Behind me, I keep hearing faint bells.
Thinking them to be bells around some cow's neck, I don't bother to turn around.
Plus it's kilometer number 32 of 35 at 12:30 pm; I could care less where those bells are coming from.
At the next rest stop, four of us find a shady spot to rest for a couple minutes.
Everyone is exhausted as Kumar declares, "I'm now officially tired. "
Just then, I see a young man pushing an old ice-cream cart, wiping the sweat off his brow. "
Ting, ting, ting," the bells keep ringing from his cart.
He pauses momentarily, looking to me as if to say, "Do you want to buy some ice-cream? "
" No, bro, we are on a walking pilgrimage.
We can't eat ice-cream. "
I tell him.
He nods and keeps pushing the cart.
Couple of minutes later, all of us start walking again.
As I stand up, I wonder if I can "turn it up".
So many times, in my moments of inspiration, I feel incredibly heroic and then I always end up saying to myself, "Yeah, but can you feel this way in your weakest moments? "
Fortunately, or unfortunately, I am reminded of that feeling and say to myself, "Here it is.
Here's your test. "
Part of me is anxious, as if I'm about to jump onto a crazy Disneyland ride.
Yet a bigger part of me is pumped-up to knock down the fear and laziness.
All of a sudden, I forget about my busted knee, hurting toe, and thirsty throat.
Instead, I remember my tennis playing days when you often have to dig deep within to find that extra juice.
I reiterate my "put it all on the line" mantra for this pilgrimage.
A gush of energy passes through me and I start walking fast.
Incredibly fast.
Pretty soon, I start hearing bells again.
This time it's in front of me, the same ice-cream cart that has passed us earlier.
As I am walking towards it, I visualize a nice, cold, Indianized vanilla ice-cream topped with fruity sugar syrup on my parched tongue.
Heaven for my sweet-tooth, especially on a hot day.
For so long, perhaps longer than I can remember, my senses have always gotten the best of me.
But right now, I'm pumped-up.
I'm ready.
I cross the road so I'm right behind the cart.
And right in the next moment, I start pushing the cart.
The young man pushing the cart looks to me quizzically, as I explain, "It's really hot and you've been pushing this heavy cart for a while.
Allow me to push it so you can take a little break. "
Not knowing what to say, he lets go of one of his hands on the cart and lets me push.
We start chatting.
His name is Bhatt , he has two kids, and lives in a nearby village.
By moving his cart for about 12 kilometers everyday, for about 12 hours, he manages to make up to 200 rupees per day.
In the middle of exchanging personal life information, I pop in a weird question, "Bhatt, do you like ice-cream?"
After thinking about it for a while, he says, "Yeah, I like it, but I generally don't eat it. "
" Do you have good ice-creams?
What all do you get? "
I asked him as if we're old buddies by now.
Perhaps thinking that he's made a customer out of me, he eagerly says, "Oh, oh, lots of them.
There's this 1 rupee ice-cream, this mango ice-cream and this 15 rupee chocobar too. "
"Bhatt, today, I want to buy you an ice-cream.
Will you eat it? "
I catch him off guard. "
Um, ummm... " he mumbles and rearranges the cap on his head that seems too small for his head.
I explain further, "I can't have an ice-cream but it would give me great joy to see you eat an ice-cream.
We are brothers, aren't we?
So whether you have it or I have it, it would give me the same joy.
Go ahead, go ahead and grab your favorite ice-cream. "
I stop the cart that I've been pushing.
Convinced by my argument, he opens the refrigerated compartment of his cart and grabs one ice-cream.
I tell him to pick his absolute favorite one and he exchanges the one in his hand for another one.
It's a 5 rupee raspberry ice-cream.
With a wide smile on his face, he slurps away the ice-cream on this hot day.
No one has ever bought him an ice-cream before.
By this simple act, our conversations take a spiritual turn.
None of his hands are holding the cart now; he is busy trying to eat the ice-cream before it melts.
I casually place a 5 rupee coin on his cart.
" Do you pray, Bhatt? "
I ask him point-blank.
Instead of looking up ahead at the road, he turns his head to the right and looks at me squarely in my eyes, "Oh yes.
Every single day. "
In that moment, it was almost as if he silently connected our experience with that part of his being.
My three kilometers are up.
Like old tree leaves whose time has come, my physical complaints and ice-cream fantasies fall on the ground, somewhere along the way.
The cart rests at an intersection where Bhatt is to go right, and I head for left.
We part ways.
As the cart departs, I hear the bells jingle once again.
This time, the sound is neither behind me nor in front of me.
It's within me.
I'm so happy to be alive.
When I was quite young, my father had one of the first telephones in our neighborhood.
I remember well the polished old case fastened to the wall.
The shiny receiver hung on the side of the box.
I was too little to reach the telephone, but used to listen with fascination when my mother used to talk to it.
Then I discovered that somewhere inside the wonderful device lived an amazing person - her name was "Information Please" and there was nothing she did not know. "
Information Please" could supply anybody's number and the correct time.
My first personal experience with this genie-in-the-bottle came one day while my mother was visiting a neighbor.
Amusing myself at the tool bench in the basement, I whacked my finger with a hammer.
The pain was terrible, but there didn't seem to be any reason in crying because there was no one home to give sympathy.
I walked around the house sucking my throbbing finger, finally arriving at the stairway.
The telephone!
Quickly, I ran for the footstool in the parlour and dragged it to the landing.
Climbing up, I unhooked the receiver and held it to my ear. "
Information Please. "
I said into the mouthpiece just above my head.
A click or two and a small clear voice spoke into my ear, "Information. "
" I hurt my finger... " I wailed into the phone.
The tears came readily enough now that I had an audience. "
Isn't your mother home? "
came the question.
" Nobody's home but me. "
I blubbered.
" Are you bleeding? "
" No," I replied, "I hit my finger with the hammer and it hurts. "
" Can you open your icebox? "
she asked.
I said I could. "
Then chip off a little piece of ice and hold it to your finger."
said the voice.
After that, I called "Information Please" for everything.
I asked her for help with my geography and she told me where California was.
She helped me with my math.
She told me my pet chipmunk that I had caught in the park just the day before would eat fruits and nuts.
Then, there was the time Petey, our pet canary, died.
I called "Information Please" and told her the sad story.
She listened, then said the usual things grown-ups say to soothe a child.
But I was unconsoled.
I asked her, "Why is it that birds should sing so beautifully and bring joy to all families, only to end up as a heap of feathers on the bottom of a cage? "
She must have sensed my deep concern, for she said quietly, "Paul, always remember that there are other worlds to sing in. "
Somehow I felt better.
Another day I was on the telephone, "Information Please. "
"Information," said the now familiar voice.
" How do you spell 'fix'? "
I asked.
All this took place in a small town in the Pacific Northwest.
When I was 9 years old, we moved across the country to Boston.
I missed my friend very much. "
Information Please" belonged in that old wooden box back home, and somehow I never thought of trying the shiny new phone that sat on the table in the hall.
As I grew into my teens, the memories of those childhood conversations never really left me.
Often, in moments of doubt and perplexity I would recall the serene sense of security I had then.
I appreciated now how patient, understanding, and kind she was to have spent her time on a little boy.
A few years later, on my way west to college, my plane put down in Seattle.
I had about half an hour or so between planes.
I spent 15 minutes or so on the phone with my sister, who lived there now.
Then, without thinking what I was doing, I dialed my hometown operator and said, "Information, Please. "
Miraculously, I heard the small, clear voice I knew so well, "Information. "
I hadn't planned this but I heard myself saying, "Could you please tell me how to spell 'fix'? "
There was a long pause.
Then came the softly spoken answer, "I guess your finger must have healed by now. "
I laughed. "
So it's really still you," I said, "I wonder if you have any idea how much you meant to me during that time." "
I wonder," she said, "if you know how much your calls meant to me.
I never had any children, and I used to look forward to your calls. "
I told her how often I had thought of her over the years and I asked if I could call her again when I came back to visit my sister.
" Please do. "
she said, "Just ask for Lily. "
Three months later I was back in Seattle.
A different voice answered, "Information. "
I asked for Lily. "
Are you a friend? "
she asked. "
Yes, a very old friend," I answered.
" I'm sorry to have to tell you this," she said, "Lily had been working part-time the last few years because she was sick.
She died five weeks ago. "
Before I could hang up she said, "Wait a minute.
Is your name Paul? "
"Yes. "
" Well, Lily left a message for you.
She wrote it down in case you called.
Let me read it to you.
The note says, 'Tell him I still say there are other worlds to sing in.
He'll know what I mean.' "
I thanked her and hung up.
I knew what Lily meant.
Never underestimate the impression you may make on others.
On that note I would like to ask you to remember how much difference one person can make in someone's life.
A painter hangs his or her finished picture on a wall, and everyone can see it.
A composer writes a work, but no one can hear it until it is performed.
Professional singers and players have great responsibilities, for the composer is utterly dependent on them.
A student of music needs as long and as arduous a training to become a performer as a medical student needs to become a doctor.
Most training is concerned with technique, for musicians have to have the muscular proficiency of an athlete or a ballet dancer.
Singers practice breathing every day, as their vocal chords would be inadequate without controlled muscular support.
String players practice moving the fingers of the left hand up and down, while drawing the bow to and fro with the right arm - two entirely different movements.
Singers and instrumentalists have to be able to get every note perfectly in tune.
Pianists are spared this particular anxiety, for the notes are already there, waiting for them, and it is the piano tuner's responsibility to tune the instrument for them.
But they have their own difficulties: the hammers that hit the strings have to be coaxed not to sound like percussion, and each overlapping tone has to sound clear.
This problem of getting clear texture is one that confronts student conductors: they have to learn to know every note of the music and how it should sound, and they have to aim at controlling these sounds with fanatical but selfless authority.
Technique is of no use unless it is combined with musical knowledge and understanding.
Great artists are those who are so thoroughly at home in the language of music that they can enjoy performing works written in any century.
I have your letter, my adorable love.
It has filled my heart with joy... Ever since I left you I have been sad all the time.
My only happiness is near you.
I go over endlessly in my thought of your kisses, your tears, your delicious jealousy.
The charm of my wonderful Josephine kindles a living, blazing fire in my heart and senses.
When shall I be able to pass every minute near you, with nothing to do but to love you and nothing to think of but the pleasure of telling you of it and giving you proof of it?
I loved you some time ago; since then I feel that I love you a thousand times better.
Ever since I have known you I adore you more every day.
That proves how wrong is that saying of La Bruyère "Love comes all of a sudden".
Ah, let me see some of your faults; be less beautiful, less graceful, less tender, less good.
But never be jealous and never shed tears.
Your tears send me out of my mind... they set my very blood on fire.
Believe me that it is utterly impossible for me to have a single thought that is not yours, a single fancy that is not submissive to your will.
Rest well.
Restore your health.
Come back to me and then at any rate before we die we ought to be able to say: "We were happy for so very many days!"
Millions of kisses even to your dog.
I was standing in line at our local Wal-Mart with one item in my hand at the express lane checkout.
The lady in front of me was a fragile-looking senior citizen.
Since I had been widowed fairly recently, and was still walking around in that pervasive fog that was a combination of ennui and sadness, I was so self-absorbed in my own little world of gloom that it wasn't really registering in my brain that the little old lady was having trouble getting her items out of her shopping cart and placing them on the counter.
I stood there blankly watching her, pretty much numb to what was going on around me and to take any action and lend her a hand.
She slowly managed to get her purchases on the checkout counter, then began to fumble in her purse, and seemed to get more and more rattled and frustrated.
I was also oblivious to the fact that the lady in line behind me was obviously disgruntled with the speed at which we were not moving forward.
What finally woke me out of my self-absorbed reverie was the rather loud pronouncement of the woman behind me, stating in a peeved tone of voice, "This is the express lane, that girl (the checkout person) should tell her to go to some other checkout! "
I then noticed that the little white-haired lady in front of me, indeed, had more than the allotted 10 items one was supposed to have.
Then the woman behind me breathed a huge audible sigh and said, "God, I can't believe this. "
Of course, both statements were said loudly enough for the checkout person and the old woman to hear.
The teenager at the cash register looked a little panic-stricken, as if it were her fault, and the senior in front of me startled; her palsy worsened and she seemed even more rattled.
At that point I turned to the woman behind me and said in my sweetest, most condescending tone (oh yeah, I was being a totally sarcastic hypocrite at this point), "Oh yes, she does have too many items, doesn't she? "
Then I added, "I think that can be easily remedied."
And smiling, I moved seven or eight of the old lady's items back to where my lonely bottle of something or other lay on the counter, and said, "Put this on my tab, but you can bag it for her.
There, the problem is solved. "
The complaining woman behind me never breathed another word.
The senior in front of me looked like a deer caught in the headlights for a moment, then broke into the most amazing smile.
Since she was still rattled and fumbling around for her money, I just whipped out my credit card and told the girl to just ring it ALL up as my bill.
Of course I got a big thank-you from the little old lady in front of me, but what it did for my own psyche was way more than what her little inexpensive assortment of purchases came to.
What it did for me was way beyond the simple "feel good" of the moment.
I had learned an important lesson.
One of the best ways to move beyond our own problems in life, is to step outside of our comfort zone, forget about ourselves for a moment, and do something for somebody else.
In hindsight, I owe a thank-you to both of those women; one for giving me the opportunity, the other for being the catalyst that prompted me into action.
When he told me he was leaving I felt like a vase which has just smashed.
There were pieces of me all over the tidy, tan tiles.
He kept talking, telling me why he was leaving, explaining it was for the best.
I had heard it before many times and yet somehow was still not immune; perhaps one did not become immune to such felony.
He left and I tried to get on with my life.
I filled the kettle and put it on to boil.
I took out my old red mug and filled it with coffee, watching as each coffee granule slipped in to the bone china.
That was what my life had been like, endless omissions of coffee granules, somehow never managing to make that cup of coffee.
Somehow when the kettle piped its finishing warning I pretended not to hear it.
That was what Mike's leaving had been like, sudden and with an awful finality.
I would rather just wallow in uncertainty than have things finished.
I laughed at myself.
Imagine getting all philosophical and sentimental about a mug of coffee.
I must be getting old.
And yet it was a young woman who stared back at me from the mirror.
A young woman full of promise and hope; a young woman with bright eyes and full lips just waiting to take on the world.
I never loved Mike anyway.
Besides, there were more important things, more important than love, I insisted to myself firmly.
The lid went back on the coffee jar just like closure on the whole Mike experience.
He didn't haunt my dreams as I feared that night.
Instead I was flying far across fields and woods, looking down on those below me.
Suddenly I fell to the ground and it was only when I woke up that I realized I was shot by a hunter, brought down by the burden of not the bullet but the soul of the man who shot it.
I realized later, with some degree of understanding, that Mike was the hunter holding me down and I was the bird that longed to fly.
The next night my dream was similar to the previous night, but without the hunter.
I flew free until I met another bird who flied with me in perfect harmony.
I realized with some relief that there was a bird out there for me, there was another person, not necessarily a lover, perhaps just a friend, but there was someone out there who was my soul mate.
I thought about being a broken vase again and realized that I had glued myself back together.
What Mike had was merely a little part of my time on the earth, a little understanding of my physical being.
He had only, a little piece of me.
If we could shrink the earth's population to a village of precisely 100 people, with all the existing human ratios remaining the same, it would look something like the following:
There would be:
57 Asians
21 Europeans
14 from the Western Hemisphere, both north and south
8 Africans
52 would be female
48 would be male
70 would be non-white
30 would be white
70 would be non-Christian
30 would be Christian
89 would be heterosexual
11 would be homosexual
6 people would possess 59% of the entire world's wealth
and all 6 would be from the United States
80 would live in substandard housing
70 would be unable to read
50 would suffer from malnutrition
1 would be near death; 1 would be near birth
1 (yes, only 1) would have a college education
1 would own a computer
When one considers our world from such a compressed perspective, the need for acceptance, understanding and education becomes glaringly apparent.
The following is also something to ponder...
If you woke up this morning with more health than illness... you are more blessed than the million who will not survive this week.
If you have never experienced the danger of battle, the loneliness of imprisonment, the agony of torture, or the pangs of starvation... you are ahead of 500 million people in the world.
If you have food in the refrigerator, clothes on your body, a roof overhead and a place to sleep... you are richer than 75% of this world.
If you have money in the bank, in your wallet, and spare change in a dish someplace... you are among the top 8% of the world's wealthy.
If your parents are still alive and still married...you are very rare, even in the United States and Canada.
If you can read this message, you just received a double blessing in that someone was thinking of you, and furthermore, you are more blessed than over two billion people in the world that cannot read at all.
Someone once said: What goes around comes around.
So...
Work like you don't need the money.
Love like you've never been hurt.
Dance like nobody's watching.
Sing like nobody's listening.
Live like it's Heaven on Earth.
I got an engagement ring for Christmas.
My boyfriend and I had been dating for almost a year and both felt the time was right to join our lives together in holy matrimony.
The month of January was spent planning our perfect Alabama June wedding.
My mother, two sisters and I went to Huntsville, the closest town with a selection of bridal shops, to buy the gown that would play the leading role on my special occasion.
We had a wonderful time just being together and sharing silly jokes, but the day soon turned serious by afternoon: still no sign of the dress of my dreams.
Both sisters were ready to give up and try another day in another town, but I coerced them into one more boutique.
I had a good feeling as we entered the quaint little shop filled with the scent of fresh flower.
The elderly clerk showed us several beautiful gowns in my size and price range, but none were right.
As I opened the door to leave, the desperate shop owner announced she had one more dress in the back that was expensive and not even my size, but perhaps I might want to look at it anyway.
When she brought it out I squealed in delight.
This was it!
I rushed to the dressing room and slipped it on.
Even though it was at least two sizes larger and more costly than I had anticipated, I talked Mom into buying it.
The shop was so small it didn't offer alterations, but my excitement assured me I would be able to get it resized in my hometown.
Excitement wasn't enough.
On Monday morning, my world crumbled - when the local sewing shop informed me the dress simply could not be altered because of numerous hand-sewn pearls and sequins on the bodice.
I called the boutique for suggestions but only got their answering machine.
A friend gave me the number of a lady across town who worked at home doing alterations.
I was desperate and willing to try anything, so I decided to give her a call.
When I arrived at her modest white house on the outskirts of town, she carefully inspected my dress and asked me to try it on.
She put a handful of pins into the shoulders and sides of my gown and told me to pick it up in two days.
She was the answer to my prayers.
When the time came to pick it up, however, I grew skeptical.
How could I have been so foolish as to just leave a $1,200 wedding dress in the hands of someone I barely knew?
What if she made a mess out of it?
I had no idea if she could even sew on a button.
Thank goodness my fears were all for naught.
The dress still looked exactly the same, but it now fit as if it had been made especially for me.
I thanked the cheerful lady and paid her modest fee.
One small problem solved just in time for a bitter one to emerge.
On Valentine's Day, my fiancé called.
" Sandy, I've come to the decision that I'm not ready to get married," he announced, none too gently. "
I want to travel and experience life for a few years before settling down. "
He apologized for the inconvenience of leaving all the wedding cancellations to me and then quickly left town.
My world turned upside down.
I was angry and heartbroken and had no idea how to recover.
But days flew into weeks and weeks blended into months.
I survived.
One day in the fall of the same year, while standing in line at the supermarket, I heard someone calling my name.
I turned around to see the alterations lady.
She politely inquired about my wedding, and was shocked to discover it had been called off, but agreed it was probably for the best.
I thanked her again for adjusting my wedding gown, and assured her it was safely bagged and awaiting the day I would wear it down the aisle on the arm of my real "Mister Right".
With a sparkle in her eyes, she began telling me about her single son, Tim.
Even though I wasn't interested in dating again, I let her talk me into meeting him.
I did have my summer wedding after all, only a year later.
And I did get to wear the dress of my dream - standing beside Tim, the man I have shared the last eighteen years of my life with, whom I would never have met without that special wedding gown.
My grandmother was an iron-willed woman, the feared matriarch of our New York family back in the 1950s.
When I was five years old, she invited some friends and relatives to her Bronx apartment for a party.
Among the guests was a neighborhood big shot who was doing well in business.
His wife was proud of their social status and let everyone at the party know it.
They had a little girl about my age who was spoiled and very much used to getting her own way.
Grandmother spent a lot of time with the big shot and his family.
She considered them the most important members of her social circle and worked hard at currying their favor.
At one point during the party, I made my way to the bathroom and closed the door behind me.
A minute or two later, the little girl opened the bathroom door and grandly walked in.
I was still sitting down.
" Don't you know that little girls aren't supposed to come into the bathroom when a little boy is using it!? "
I hollered.
The surprise of my being there, along with the indignation I had heaped upon her, stunned the little girl.
Then she started to cry.
She quickly closed the door, ran to the kitchen, and tearfully complained to her parents and my grandmother.
Most of the partygoers had overheard my loud remark and were greatly amused by it.
But not Grandmother.
She was waiting for me when I left the bathroom.
I received the longest, sharpest tongue-lashing of my young life.
Grandmother yelled that I was impolite and rude and that I had insulted that nice little girl.
The guests watched and winced in absolute silence.
So forceful was my grandmother's personality that no one dared stand up for me.
After her harangue was over and I was dismissed, the party continued, but the atmosphere was much more subdued.
Twenty minutes later, all that changed.
Grandmother walked by the bathroom and noticed a torrent of water streaming out from under the door.
She shrieked twice - first in astonishment, then in rage.
She flung open the bathroom door and saw that the sink and tub were plugged up and that the faucets were going at full blast.
Everyone knew who the culprit was.
The guests quickly formed a protective barricade around me, but Grandmother was so furious that she almost got to me anyway, flailing her arms as if trying to swim over the crowd.
Several strong men eventually moved her away and calmed her down, although she sputtered and fumed for quite a while.
My grandfather took me by the hand and sat me on his lap in a chair near the window.
He was a kind and gentle man, full of wisdom and patience.
Rarely did he raise his voice to anyone, and never did he argue with his wife or defy her wishes.
He looked at me with much curiosity, not at all angry or upset. "
Tell me," he asked, "why did you do it? "
" Well, she yelled at me for nothing," I said earnestly. "
Now, she's got something to yell about. "
Grandfather didn't speak right away.
He just sat there, looking at me and smiling.
"Eric," he said at last, "you are my revenge. "
The sun is just rising on the morning of another day.
What can I wish that this day may bring me?
Nothing that shall make the world or others poorer, nothing at the expense of other men; but just those few things which in their coming do not stop with me but touch me rather, as they pass and gather strength.
I wish that this day could bring me a few friends, who understand me, and yet remain my friends; I also wish that this day could bring me a job to do which has real value.
I wish that this day could bring me a mind unafraid to travel, even though the trail be not blazed, and I wish that this day could bring me an understanding heart.
I wish that this day could bring me a sight of the eternal hills, and the blue sea stretching to the horizon, and of something beautiful which the hands of men have made.
I wish that this day could bring me a sense of humor, and the power to laugh, and a little leisure with nothing to do.
And I crave for a few moments of quiet, silent meditation on the morning of this day.
Think about the last time you felt a negative emotion - like stress, anger, or frustration.
What was going through your mind as you were going through that negativity?
Was your mind cluttered with thoughts?
Or was it paralyzed, unable to think?
The next time you find yourself in the middle of a very stressful time, or you feel angry or frustrated, stop.
Yes, that's right, stop.
Whatever you're doing, stop and sit for one minute.
While you're sitting there, completely immerse yourself in the negative emotion.
Allow that emotion to consume you.
Allow yourself one minute to truly feel that emotion.
Don't cheat yourself here.
Take the entire minute - but only one minute - to do nothing else but feel that emotion.
When the minute is over, ask yourself, "Am I willing to keep holding on to this negative emotion as I go through the rest of the day? "
Once you've allowed yourself to be totally immersed in the emotion and really feel it, you will be surprised to find that the emotion clears rather quickly.
If you feel you need to hold on to the emotion for a little longer, that is OK.
Allow yourself another minute to feel the emotion.
When you feel you've had enough of the emotion, ask yourself if you've willing to carry that negativity with you for the rest of the day.
If not, take a deep breath.
As you exhale, release all that negativity with your breath.
This exercise seems simple - almost too simple.
But, it is very effective.
By allowing that negative emotion the space to be truly felt, you are dealing with the emotion rather than stuffing it down and trying not to feel it.
You are actually taking away the power of the emotion by giving it the space and attention it needs.
When you immerse yourself in the emotion, and realize that it is only emotion, it loses its control.
You can clear your head and proceed with your task.
Try it.
Next time you're in the middle of a negative emotion, give yourself the space to feel the emotion and see what happens.
Keep a piece of paper with you that says the following:
Stop.
Immerse for one minute.
Do I want to keep this negativity?
Breathe deep, exhale, release.
Move on!
This will remind you of the steps to the process.
Remember, take the time you need to really immerse yourself in the emotion.
Then, when you feel you've felt it enough, release it - really let go of it.
You will be surprised at how quickly you can move on from a negative situation and get to what you really want to do!
To be really happy and really safe, one ought to have at least two or three hobbies, and they must all be real.
It is no use starting late in life to say: "I will take an interest in this or that. "
Such an attempt only aggravates the strain of mental effort.
A man may acquire great knowledge of topics unconnected with his daily work, and yet hardly get any benefit or relief.
It is no use doing what you like; you have got to like what you do.
Broadly speaking, human beings may be divided into three classes: those who are toiled to death, those who are worried to death, and those who are bored to death.
It is no use offering the manual labourer, tired out with a hard week's sweat and effort, the chance of playing a game of football or baseball on Saturday afternoon.
It is no use inviting the politician or the professional or business man, who has been working or worrying about serious things for six days, to work or worry about trifling things at the weekend.
It may also be said that rational, industrious, useful human beings are divided into two classes: first, those whose work is work and whose pleasure is pleasure; and secondly, those whose work and pleasure are one.
Of these the former are the majority.
They have their compensations.
The long hours in the office or the factory bring with them as their reward, not only the means of sustenance, but a keen appetite for pleasure even in its simplest and most modest forms.
But Fortune's favoured children belong to the second class.
Their life is a natural harmony.
For them the working hours are never long enough.
Each day is a holiday, and ordinary holidays when they come are grudged as enforced interruptions in an absorbing vocation.
Yet to both classes the need of an alternative outlook, of a change of atmosphere, of a diversion of effort, is essential.
Indeed, it may well be that those whose work is their pleasure are those who most need the means of banishing it at intervals from their minds.
Don't go for looks; they can deceive.
Don't go for wealth; even that fades away.
Go for someone who makes you smile.
Because it only takes a smile to make a dark day seem bright.
Find the one that makes your heart smile.
Maybe we meet a few wrong people before meeting the right one so that when we finally meet the right person, we will know how to be grateful for that gift.
It's true that we don't know what we've got until we lose it, but it's also true that we don't know what we've been missing until it arrives.
Giving someone all your love will not provide assurance that they'll love you back.
Don't expect love in return; just wait for it to grow in their hearts.
But if it doesn't, be content.
It grew in yours.
There are moments in life when you miss someone so much that you just want to pick them from your dreams and hug them for real!
May you have enough happiness to make you sweet, enough trials to make you strong, enough sorrow to keep you human, and enough hope to make you happy.
The happiest people don't necessarily have the best of everything.
They just make the most of everything that comes along their way.
Happiness lies for those who cry, those who have searched, and those who have tried because only they can appreciate the importance of people who have touched their lives.
Having spring around makes you feel different after such a long winter journey.
How well do you feel when you have a little bit of sunshine in your life?
What effect does it have on our psyche?
The power of sunshine brings us a lot of comfort, optimism, self-confidence and of course a smile.
Imagine how great it would be if we were so positive all year round!
Living like this is possible if you really think about it.
In order to exist in such a state of happiness though, we must have sunshine radiating from within ourselves, shining from our hearts, our minds and from our souls.
I bet many of you are reading this now and saying, "Yeah, that is easier said than done!"
And what do we say to that?
Well, in the end that's your choice, and if you think that way then your own life will reflect that attitude of yours!
In order to make "sunshine" or rather, "light" a part of our being, it is so important that you watch your thoughts, your words and your actions so that you do not contradict what you really feel you'd like to create in your own life.
Watch your thoughts and really become aware of how many negative thoughts pass through your mind about yourself and other people around you.
Watch to see how often you gossip about other people, and when you become aware of it you will see how often it is actually attached with feelings of jealousy, envy and insecurity about yourself.
You should also take a close look at your "intention".
How many of you do something for another person without expecting to receive something in return?
It might not even have to be a material or physical thing you expect; expecting recognition or acknowledgement for what you have done is enough to create conditions on your intention.
Think about it!
We may not always pay attention to what our true intentions are behind our words, thoughts and actions because many of us are not aware of the power and effect they have when it comes to creating our lives.
Putting all of these together, it seems that most of us are creating monsters inside of us just by simply talking, thinking and not putting our heart out with the right intention towards helping someone else.
All of these things are born from a "negative" attitude and will not help us in any way at all when it comes to bringing a brighter "sunshine" into our lives.
If you took all your negative attitudes in one hand and measured your need to feel "sunshine" in the other, you would see how both these elements really contradict each other.
Be brave and break your patterns and your habits this spring, and by doing so you will allow the true sunshine to take place by radiating out from your heart and into your life and the lives of the people who are around you!
Don't let anyone steal your dreams.
Follow your heart, no matter what.
I have a friend named Felix who owns a horse ranch in San Ysidro.
He has let me use his house to put on fund-raising events to raise money for youth at risk programs.
The last time I was there he introduced me by saying, "I want to tell you why I let Jack use my house.
It all goes back to a story about a young man who was the son of an itinerant horse trainer who would go from stable to stable, race track to race track, farm to farm and ranch to ranch, training horses.
As a result, the boy's high school career was continually interrupted.
When he was a senior, he was asked to write a paper about what he wanted to be and do when he grew up. "
" That night he wrote a seven-page paper describing his goal of someday owning a horse ranch.
He wrote about his dream in great detail and he even drew a diagram of a 200-acre ranch, showing the location of all the buildings, the stables and the track.
Then he drew a detailed floor plan for a 4, 000-square-foot house that would sit on a 200-acre dream ranch. "
" He put a great deal of his heart into the project and the next day he handed it into his teacher.
Two days later he received his paper back.
On the front page was a large red F with a note that read, 'See me after class.' "
" The boy with the dream went to see the teacher after class and asked, 'Why did I receive an F?' "
" The teacher said, 'This is an unrealistic dream for a young boy like you.
You have no money.
You come from an itinerant family.
You have to buy the land.
You have to pay for the original breeding stock and later you'll have to pay large stud fees.
There's no way you could ever do it.'
Then the teacher added, 'If you will rewrite this paper with a more realistic goal, I will reconsider your grade.' "
" The boy went home and thought about it long and hard.
He asked his father what he should do.
His father said, 'Look, son, you have to make up your own mind on this.
However, I think it is a very important decision for you.' "
" Finally, after sitting with it for a week, the boy turned in the same paper, making no changes at all.
He stated, 'You can keep the F and I'll keep my dream.' "
Felix then turned to the assembled group and said, "I tell you this story because you are sitting in my 4,000-square-foot house in the middle of my 200-acre horse ranch.
I still have that school paper framed over the fireplace. "
He added, "The best part of the story is that two summers ago that same school teacher brought 30 kids to camp out on my ranch for a week.
When the teacher was leaving, he said, 'Look, Felix, I can tell you this now.
When I was your teacher, I was something of a dream stealer.
During those years I stole a lot of kids' dreams.
Fortunately you had enough gumption not to give up on yours.' "
Don't let anyone steal your dreams.
Follow your heart, no matter what.
Step one:
Plant yourself deep in a bed of faith, and pack it down solid and tight.
Drench daily with positive thinking, and keep saturated just right.
Mulch often with forgiveness, for this will help you grow.
Quickly remove any seeds of worry, for they will soon germinate, and keep out the weeds of despair.
Nourish disappointments with hope whenever it is needed, and always stay cool and shaded when you feel irritated or heated.
Trim away guilt or depression, for they create decay, and cultivate with happy memories as often as every day.
Step two:
Harvest the lessons of the past; just dig, pick, and hoe.
And nurture the roots of the present, for now is when you flourish and grow.
Start planting for the future; set your goals in a row.
Spade the bed well for all your dreams to grow.
Step three:
Remember that grief is a natural predator, so learn to tolerate some damage.
Protect your garden with daily prayers, for this will help you manage.
Bury the criticism and complaining, for they are injurious pests.
Sow the seed of love wherever you may go - for joy, love, and laughter are surely bound to grow.
Although the thorns of life may be here to stay, just sprout a smile along the way... and be thankful for what you have today!
Stephen, a twelve-year-old boy with alcoholic parents, was about to be lost forever by the U.S. education system.
Remarkably, he could read, yet, in spite of his reading skills, Stephen was failing.
He had been failing since first grade, as he was passed on from grade to grade.
Stephen was a big boy, looking more like a teenager than a twelve-year-old, yet, Stephen went unnoticed... until Miss Smith.
Miss Smith was a smiling, young, beautiful redhead, and Stephen was in love!
For the first time in his young life, he couldn't take his eyes off his teacher; yet, still he failed.
He never did his homework, and he was always in trouble with Miss Smith.
His heart would break under her sharp words, and when he was punished for failing to turn in his homework, he felt just miserable!
Still, he did not study.
In the middle of the first semester of school, the entire seventh grade was tested for basic skills.
Stephen hurried through his tests, and continued to dream of other things, as the day wore on.
His heart was not in school, but in the woods, where he often escaped alone, trying to shut out the sights, sounds and smells of his alcoholic home.
No one checked on him to see if he was safe.
No one knew he was gone, because no one was sober enough to care.
Oddly, Stephen never missed a day of school.
One day, Miss Smith's impatient voice broke into his daydreams.
"Stephen! "
Startled, he turned to look at her.
"Pay attention!"
Stephen locked his gaze on Miss Smith with adolescent adoration, as she began to go over the test results for the seventh grade.
" You all did pretty well," she told the class, "except for one boy, and it breaks my heart to tell you this, but... " She hesitated, pinning Stephen to his seat with a sharp stare, her eyes searching his face.
" The smartest boy in the seventh grade is failing my class! "
She just stared at Stephen, as the class spun around for a good look.
Stephen dropped his eyes and carefully examined his fingertips.
After that, it was war!
Stephen still wouldn't do his homework.
Even as the punishments became more severe, he remained stubborn.
" Just try it!
One week! "
He was unmoved.
" You're smart enough!
You'll see a change!"
Nothing fazed him.
"Give yourself a chance!
Don't give up on your life! "
Nothing.
"Stephen!
Please!
I care about you! "
Wow!
Suddenly, Stephen got it!!
Someone cared about him?
Someone, totally unattainable and perfect, cared about him?!
Stephen went home from school, thoughtful, that afternoon.
Walking into the house, he took one look around.
Both parents were passed out, in various stages of undress, and the stench was overpowering!
He, quickly, gathered up his camping gear, a jar of peanut butter, a loaf of bread, a bottle of water, and this time... his schoolbooks.
Grim-faced and determined, he headed for the woods.
The following Monday he arrived at school on time, and he waited for Miss Smith to enter the classroom.
She walked in, all sparkle and smiles!
God, she was beautiful!
He yearned for her smile to turn on him.
It did not.
Miss Smith, immediately, gave a quiz on the weekend homework.
Stephen hurried through the test, and was the first to hand in his paper.
With a look of surprise, Miss Smith took his paper.
Obviously puzzled, she began to look it over.
Stephen walked back to his desk, his heart pounding within his chest.
As he sat down, he couldn't resist another look at the lovely woman.
Miss Smith's face was in total shock!
She glanced up at Stephen, then down, then up.
Suddenly, her face broke into a radiant smile.
The smartest boy in the seventh grade had just passed his first test!
From that moment nothing was the same for Stephen.
Life at home remained the same, but life still changed.
He discovered that not only could he learn, but he was good at it!
He discovered that he could understand and retain knowledge, and that he could translate the things he learned into his own life.
Stephen began to excel!
And he continued this course throughout his school life.
After high-school Stephen enlisted in the Navy, and he had a successful military career.
During that time, he met the love of his life, he raised a family, and he graduated from a college.
During his Naval career, he inspired many young people, who without him, might not have believed in themselves.
Stephen began a second career after the Navy, and he continues to inspire others, as an adjunct professor in a nearby college.
Miss Smith left a great legacy.
She saved one boy who has changed many lives.
I know, because I am the love of his life.
You see, it's simple, really.
A change took place within the heart of one boy, all because of one teacher, who cared.
Two friends and I moved into a house off campus when I was a junior at Iowa State University.
We were all a bit afraid of our landlord, a gruff middle-aged man.
He gave us a lecture about paying the rent on time and maintaining the house and appliances.
During the fall semester, my housemates and I threw a party.
We sent invitations to many friends and told everyone to come to our house on Friday night.
We drew a large crowd and everyone had a great time.
The last guests left in the wee hours of the morning.
Exhausted, we decided to sleep in and clean the house and yard the next morning.
Well, you guessed it!
We were awakened about 7:00 a.m. by our landlord, who was knocking on the door.
Sheepishly, we let him in, expecting to incur his wrath.
Instead, he picked up a party invitation that had been lying on the sidewalk and asked, "Why didn't you girls invite me?"
He came into the house, made a minor repair, and spent a few minutes helping us pick up trash from the yard.
We weren't quite sure what to make of our unexpected luck, but we were thrilled that our landlord had been so understanding.
A few months later, I made a mathematical error while balancing my checkbook and my bank soon notified me that I had bounced a check.
I was mortified when I discovered that it was my rent check and that I had to notify my landlord, I figured that he viewed my housemates and I as irresponsible after the party incident and this would prove him right.
I was certain that he would evict me.
Somehow, I mustered the courage to call him and explained what had happened.
He said, "I have a daughter about your age, and the same thing happened to her once.
Would you like to wait until next month and send a double payment then? "
I've never forgotten our landlord's kindness and understanding.
He also taught me an important lesson about not judging a book by its cover.
I'm proud to say that I have not bounced a check since (though I have thrown a few more parties)!
" I rode my bike for 40 minutes every morning to a hotel with a lot of foreign tourists.
I showed them around and practiced my English.
Those eight years deeply changed me. "
Jack Ma hit pay dirt when his Chinese business-to-business start-up, Alibaba.com, went public, in November, 2007.
The offering raised more than $1.5 billion and gave the company a valuation of $26 billion.
Ma, 43, grew up in the 1960s.
He taught himself English, then caught the Internet wave as China's economy opened in the 1990s.
Today, Alibaba is China's largest B2B site and a favorite among American and European companies that are buying from Chinese suppliers.
The site earned $39 million on revenues of $129 million in the first half of 2007.
Ma has also taken Alibaba into search, through a joint venture with Yahoo, and his Taobao online auction site has become bigger than eBay in China.
" When I was 12 years old, I got interested in learning English.
I rode my bike for 40 minutes every morning, rain or snow, for eight years to a hotel near the city of Hangzhou's West Lake district, about 100 miles southwest of Shanghai.
China was opening up, and a lot of foreign tourists went there.
I showed them around as a free guide and practiced my English.
Those eight years deeply changed me.
I started to become more globalized than most Chinese.
What I learned from my teachers and books was different from what the foreign visitors told me.
" The other event that fundamentally changed me was in 1979, when I met a family with two kids from Australia.
We met and spent three days together and played Frisbee.
We became pen pals.
In 1985 they invited me to go to Australia for a summer vacation.
I went in July, and those 31 days changed my life.
Since then, I started to think differently.
" I flunked my exam for university twice before I was accepted by what was considered my city's worst university, Hangzhou Normal University.
I was studying to be a high school English teacher.
In my university, I was elected student chairman and later became chairman of the city's Students Federation.
" When I graduated, I was the only one of 500 students assigned to teach at a university.
My pay was 100 to 120 yuan (RMB), which is like $12 to $15 per month.
I always had a dream that when I finished my five years, I would join a business - a hotel or whatever.
I just wanted to go and do something.
In 1992, the business environment started improving.
I applied for a lot of jobs, but nobody wanted me!
I was turned down for secretary to the general manager of a Kentucky Fried Chicken.
" Then, in 1995, I went to Seattle as an interpreter for a trade delegation.
A friend showed me the Internet there for the first time.
We searched the word 'beer' on Yahoo and discovered that there was no data about China.
We decided to launch a website and registered the name 'China Pages. "
" I borrowed $2,000 to set up the company.
I knew nothing about personal computers or e-mails.
I had never touched a keyboard before that.
That's why I call myself 'blind man riding on the back of a blind tiger. "
" We competed with China Telecom for about a year.
The general manager of China Telecom offered to invest $185, 000 to do a joint venture.
It was the most money I had ever seen in my life.
But unfortunately, China Telecom got five seats on the board.
I got two seats on the board.
Everything we suggested, they turned us down.
It was like an elephant and an ant.
I resigned.
Then, I got an offer to come to Beijing and run a new government group to promote e-commerce.
" My dream was to set up my own e-commerce company.
In 1999, I gathered 18 people in my apartment and spoke to them for two hours about my vision.
Everyone put their money on the table and that got us $60, 000 to start Alibaba.
I wanted to have a global company, so I chose a global name.
Alibaba is easy to spell and people everywhere associate that with 'Open, Sesame,' the command that Ali Baba used to open doors to hidden treasures in One Thousand and One Nights, the book of Arabian folktales.
" There were three reasons why we survived.
We had no money, we had no technology, and we had no plan.
Every dollar, we used very carefully.
The office opened in my apartment.
We expanded when we raised money from Goldman Sachs in 1999 and then Softbank Corporation in 2000.
" We're in China today because I believe in one thing: global vision, local win.
We designed the business model ourselves.
Our focus is on helping small-and medium-size companies make money.
We never copied a model from the U.S., like a lot of Chinese Internet entrepreneurs did.
We focused on product quality.
It has to be 'click and get it.'
If I can't get it, then it's rubbish.
" I call Alibaba '1,001 mistakes.'
We expanded too fast, and then in the dot-com bubble, we had to have layoffs.
By 2002, we had only enough cash to survive for 18 months.
We had a lot of free members using our site, and we didn't know how we'd make money.
So we developed a product for Chinese exporters to meet buyers in the U.S. online.
This model saved us.
Each year we improved.
Today, Alibaba is very profitable.
" The lessons I learned from the dark days at Alibaba are that you've got to make your team have value, innovation, and vision.
Also, if you don't give up, you still have a chance.
" Going public was an important milestone for Alibaba.
The time was right.
Our B2B company is established, market conditions are healthy, and management is strong.
The reception proved a Chinese mainland company can list in Hong Kong and still get a very strong valuation and global investor interest.
" My vision is to build an e-commerce ecosystem that allows consumers and businesses to do all aspects of business online.
We are going into search with Yahoo, and have launched online auction and payment businesses.
I want to create one million jobs, change China's social and economic environment, and make it the largest Internet market in the world.
" What is important in my life is that I can do something that can influence many people and influence China's development.
When I am myself, I am relaxed and happy and have a good result. "
As a boy growing up in Shenyang, China, I practiced the piano six hours a day.
I loved the instrument.
At first I played on clunky Chinese keyboards - cheap, but the best we could afford.
Later my parents bought me a Swedish piano, but I broke half the strings on it playing Tchaikovsky.
That's when my parents and my teacher decided I was too much for such an instrument - and for our hometown.
To be a serious musician, I would have to move to Beijing, our cultural capital.
I was just eight years old.
My father, who played the erhu, a two-stringed instrument, made a great sacrifice.
To relocate to Beijing with me, he quit his concertmaster's job, which he loved, and my mother stayed behind in Shenyang to keep working at her job at the science institute to support us.
Suddenly my father and I were newcomers - outsiders.
To the others around us, we spoke with funny northern accents.
The only apartment we could find for the money we had was in an unheated building, with five families sharing one bathroom.
My father cooked, cleaned and looked after me.
He became a housewife, basically.
We lived far from my school, and since the bus was too expensive, my father would "drive" me on his bicycle every day.
It was an hour-and-a-half trip each way, and I was a heavy boy, much heavier than I am as an adult.
He did this in winter too.
Imagine!
During the coldest nights, while I practiced the piano, my father would lie in my bed so it would be warm when I was tired.
I was miserable, but not from the poverty or pressure.
My new teacher in Beijing didn't like me. "
You have no talent," she often told me. "
You will never be a pianist. "
And one day, she "fired" me.
I was just nine years old.
I was devastated.
I didn't want to be a pianist anymore, I decided.
I wanted to go home to my mother.
For the next two weeks I didn't touch the piano.
Wisely, my father didn't push.
He just waited.
Sure enough, the day came at school when my teacher asked me to play some holiday songs.
I didn't want to, but as I placed my fingers on the piano's keys, I realized I could show other people that I had talent after all.
That day I told my father what he'd been waiting to hear - that I wanted to study with a new teacher.
From that point on, everything turned around.
I started winning competitions.
It was soon clear I couldn't stay in China forever.
To become a world-class musician, I had to play on the world's big stages.
So in 1997, my father and I moved again, this time to Philadelphia, so I could attend The Curtis Institute of Music.
Finally our money worries were easing.
The school paid for an apartment and even lent me a Steinway.
At night, I would sneak into the living room just to touch the keys.
Now that I was in America, I wanted to become famous, but my new teachers reminded me that I had a lot to learn.
I spent two years practicing, and by 1999 I had worked hard enough for fortune to take over.
The Chicago Symphony Orchestra heard me play and liked me, but orchestra schedules were set far in advance.
I thought I might join them in a few years.
The next morning, I got a call.
The great pianist Andre Watts, who was to play the "Gala Benefit Evening" at Chicago's Ravinia Festival, had become ill.
I was asked to substitute.
That performance was, for me, the moment.
After violinist Isaac Stern introduced me, I played Tchaikovsky's Piano Concerto No.
1.
My father's mouth hung open throughout the entire song.
Afterward, people celebrated - maybe they were a bit drunk - and asked me to play Bach's Goldberg Variations.
So I played until 3:30 a.m. I felt something happening.
Sure enough, gigs started pouring in.
Lincoln Center.
Carnegie Hall.
Still, my father kept telling me, "You'd better practice! "
The world is filled with smart, talented, educated and gifted people.
We meet them every day.
A few days ago, my car was not running well.
I pulled it into a garage and the young mechanic had it fixed in just a few minutes.
He knew what was wrong by simply listening to the engine.
I was amazed.
The sad truth is, great talent is not enough.
I am constantly shocked at how little talented people earn.
I heard the other day that less than 5 percent of Americans earn more than $100,000 a year.
A business consultant who specializes in the medical trade was telling me how many doctors, dentists and chiropractors struggle financially.
All this time, I thought that when they graduated, the dollars would pour in.
It was this business consultant who gave me the phrase, "They are one skill away from great wealth. "
What this phrase means is that most people need only to learn and master one more skill and their income would jump exponentially.
I have mentioned before that financial intelligence is a synergy of accounting, investing, marketing and law.
Combine those four technical skills and making money with money is easier.
When it comes to money, the only skill most people know is to work hard.
When I graduated from the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy in 1969, my educated dad was happy.
Standard Oil of California had hired me for its oil-tanker fleet.
I had a great career ahead of me, yet I resigned after six months with the company and joined the Marine Corps to learn how to fly.
My educated dad was devastated.
Rich dad congratulated me.
Job security meant everything to my educated dad.
Learning meant everything to my rich dad.
Educated dad thought I went to school to learn to be a ship's officer.
Rich dad knew that I went to school to study international trade.
So as a student, I made cargo runs, navigating large freighters, oil tankers and passenger ships to the Far East and the South Pacific.
While most of my classmates were partying at their fraternity houses, I was studying trade, people and cultures in Japan, Thailand, Singapore, Hong Kong of China, Vietnam, Republic of Korea and the Philippines.
I also was partying, but it was not in any frat house.
I grew up rapidly.
There is an old cliché that goes, "Job is an acronym for 'Just over Broke'. "
And unfortunately, I would say that the saying applies to millions of people.
Because school does not think financial intelligence is intelligence, most workers "live within their means".
They work and they pay the bills.
Instead I recommend to young people to seek work for what they will learn, more than what they will earn.
Look down the road at what skills they want to acquire before choosing a specific profession and before getting trapped in the "Rat Race".
Once people are trapped in the lifelong process of bill paying, they become like those little hamsters running around in those little metal wheels.
Their little furry legs are spinning furiously, the wheel is turning furiously, but come tomorrow morning, they'll still be in the same cage: great job.
When I ask the classes I teach, "How many of you can cook a better hamburger than McDonald's? "
Almost all the students raise their hands.
I then ask, "So if most of you can cook a better hamburger, how come McDonald's makes more money than you?"
The answer is obvious: McDonald's is excellent at business systems.
The reason so many talented people are poor is because they focus on building a better hamburger and know little or nothing about business systems.
The world is filled with talented poor people.
All too often, they're poor or struggle financially or earn less than they are capable of, not because of what they know but because of what they do not know.
They focus on perfecting their skills at building a better hamburger rather than the skills of selling and delivering the hamburger.
I am honored to be with you today at your commencement from one of the finest universities in the world.
I never graduated from college.
Truth be told, this is the closest I've ever gotten to a college graduation.
Today I want to tell you three stories from my life.
That's it.
No big deal.
Just three stories.
The first story is about connecting the dots.
I dropped out of Reed College after the first 6 months, but then stayed around as a drop-in for another 18 months or so before I really quit.
So why did I drop out?
It started before I was born.
My biological mother was a young, unwed college graduate student, and she decided to put me up for adoption.
She felt very strongly that I should be adopted by college graduates, so everything was all set for me to be adopted at birth by a lawyer and his wife.
Except that when I popped out they decided at the last minute that they really wanted a girl.
So my parents, who were on a waiting list, got a call in the middle of the night asking: "We have an unexpected baby boy; do you want him? "
They said: "Of course. "
My biological mother later found out that my mother had never graduated from college and that my father had never graduated from high school.
She refused to sign the final adoption papers.
She only relented a few months later when my parents promised that I would someday go to college.
And 17 years later I did go to college.
But I naively chose a college that was almost as expensive as Stanford, and all of my working-class parents' savings were being spent on my college tuition.
After six months, I couldn't see the value in it.
I had no idea what I wanted to do with my life and no idea how college was going to help me figure it out.
And here I was spending all of the money my parents had saved their entire life.
So I decided to drop out and trust that it would all work out OK.
It was pretty scary at the time, but looking back it was one of the best decisions I ever made.
The minute I dropped out I could stop taking the required classes that didn't interest me, and begin dropping in on the ones that looked interesting.
It wasn't all romantic.
I didn't have a dorm room, so I slept on the floor in friends' rooms, I returned coke bottles for the five-cent deposits to buy food with, and I would walk the 7 miles across town every Sunday night to get one good meal a week at the Hare Krishna temple.
I loved it.
And much of what I stumbled into by following my curiosity and intuition turned out to be priceless later on.
Let me give you one example:
Reed College at that time offered perhaps the best calligraphy instruction in the country.
Throughout the campus every poster, every label on every drawer, was beautifully hand calligraphed.
Because I had dropped out and didn't have to take the normal classes, I decided to take a calligraphy class to learn how to do this.
I learned about serif and san serif typefaces, about varying the amount of space between different letter combinations, about what makes great typography great.
It was beautiful, historical, artistically subtle in a way that science can't capture, and I found it fascinating.
None of this had even a hope of any practical application in my life.
But ten years later, when we were designing the first Macintosh computer, it all came back to me.
And we designed it all into the Mac.
It was the first computer with beautiful typography.
If I had never dropped in on that single course in college, the Mac would have never had multiple typefaces or proportionally spaced fonts.
And since Windows just copied the Mac, it's likely that no personal computer would have them.
If I had never dropped out, I would have never dropped in on this calligraphy class, and personal computers might not have the wonderful typography that they do.
Of course it was impossible to connect the dots looking forward when I was in college.
But it was very, very clear looking backwards ten years later.
Again, you can't connect the dots looking forward; you can only connect them looking backwards.
So you have to trust that the dots will somehow connect in your future.
You have to trust in something - your gut, destiny, life, karma, whatever.
This approach has never let me down, and it has made all the difference in my life.
For someone who is such an extraordinarily successful investor, Warren Buffett comes off as a pretty ordinary guy.
Born and bred in Omaha, Nebraska, for more than 40 years Buffett has lived in the same gray stucco house on Farnam Street that he bought for $31,500.
He wears rumpled, nondescript suits, drives his own car, drinks Cherry Coke, and is more likely to be found in a Dairy Queen than a four-star restaurant.
But the 68-year-old Omaha native has led an extraordinary life.
Looking back on his childhood, one can see the budding of a savvy businessman.
Warren Edward Buffett was born on August 30, 1930, the middle child of three.
His father, Howard Buffett, came from a family of grocers but himself became a stockbroker and later a U.S. congressman.
Even as a young child, Buffett was pretty serious about making money.
He used to go door-to-door and sell soda pop.
He and a friend used math to develop a system for picking winners in horseracing and started selling their "Stable-Boy Selections" tip sheets until they were shut down for not having a license.
Later, he also worked at his grandfather's grocery store.
At the ripe age of 11, Buffett bought his first stock.
When his family moved to Washington D.C., Buffett became a paperboy for The Washington Post and its rival the Times-Herald.
Buffett ran his five paper routes like an assembly line and even added magazines to round out his product offerings.
While still in school, he was making $175 a month, a full-time wage for many young men.
When he was 14, Buffett spent $1,200 on 40 acres of farmland in Nebraska and soon began collecting rent from a tenant farmer.
He and a friend also made $50 a week by placing pinball machines in barber shops.
They called their venture Wilson Coin Operated Machine Co.
Already a successful albeit small-time businessman, Buffett wasn't keen on going to college but ended up at Wharton at the University of Pennsylvania - his father encouraged him to go.
After two years at Wharton, Buffett transferred to his parents' alma mater, the University of Nebraska in Lincoln, for his final year of college.
There Buffett took a job with the Lincoln Journal supervising 50 paper boys in six rural counties.
Buffett applied to Harvard Business School but was turned down in what had to be one of the worst admission decisions in Harvard history.
The outcome ended up profoundly affecting Buffett's life, for he ended up attending Columbia Business School, where he studied under revered mentor Benjamin Graham, the father of securities analysis who provided the foundation for Buffett's investment strategy.
From the beginning, Buffett made his fortune from investing.
He started with all the money he had made from selling pop, delivering papers, and operating pinball machines.
Between 1950 and 1956, he grew his $9,800 kitty to $14,000.
From there, he organized investment partnerships with his family and friends, and then gradually drew in other investors through word of mouth and very attractive terms.
Buffett's goal was to top the Dow Jones Industrial Average by an average of 10% a year.
Over the length of the Buffett partnership between 1957 and 1969, Buffett's investments grew at a compound annual rate of 29.5%, crushing the Dow's return of 7.4% over the same period.
Buffett's investment strategy mirrors his lifestyle and overall philosophy.
He doesn't collect houses or cars or works of art, and he disdains companies that waste money on such extravagances as limousines, private dining rooms, and high-priced real estate.
He is a creature of habit - same house, same office, same city, same soda - and dislikes change.
In his investments, that means holding on to "core holdings" such as American Express, Coca-Cola, and The Washington Post Co. "forever. "
Buffett's view of inherited money also departs from the norm.
Critical of the self-indulgence of the super-rich, Buffett thinks of inheritances as "privately funded food stamps" that keep children of the rich from leading normal, independent lives.
With his own three kids, he gave them each $10,000 a year - the tax-deductible limit - at Christmas.
When he gave them a loan, they had to sign a written agreement.
When his daughter, also named Susie like her mother, needed $20 to park at the airport, he made her write him a check for it.
As for charity, Buffett's strict standards have made it difficult for him to give much away.
He evaluates charities the same way he looks for stocks: value for money, return on invested capital.
He has established the Buffett Foundation, designed to accumulate money and give it away after his and his wife's deaths - though the foundation has given millions to organizations involved with population control, family planning, abortion, and birth control.
The argument goes that Buffett can actually give away a greater sum in the end by growing his money while he's still alive.
One thing's for sure about Buffett - he's happy doing what he's doing. "
I get to do what I like to do every single day of the year," he says. "
I get to do it with people I like, and I don't have to associate with anybody who causes my stomach to churn.
I tap dance to work, and when I get there I think I'm supposed to lie on my back and paint the ceiling.
It's tremendous fun. "
It's fun to watch the master at work, too.
Drink to me only with thine eyes,
And I will pledge with mine;
Or leave a kiss but in the cup
And I'll not look for wine.
The thirst that from the soul doth rise Doth ask a drink divine;
But might I of Jove's nectar sup,
I would not change for thine.
I sent thee late a rosy wreath,
Not so much honouring thee
As giving it a hope that there
It could not wither'd be;
But thou thereon didst only breathe
And sent'st it back to me;
Since when it grows, and smells, I swear,
Not of itself but thee!
I spent my Saturday nights in New York because those gleaming, dazzling parties of his were with me so vividly that I could still hear the music and the laughter, faint and incessant, from his garden, and the cars going up and down his drive.
One night I did hear a material car there, and saw its lights stop at his front steps.
But I didn't investigate.
Probably it was some final guest who had been away at the ends of the earth and didn't know that the party was over.
On the last night, with my trunk packed and my car sold to the grocer, I went over and looked at that huge incoherent failure of a house once more.
On the white steps an obscene word, scrawled by some boy with a piece of brick, stood out clearly in the moonlight, and I erased it, drawing my shoe raspingly along the stone.
Then I wandered down to the beach and sprawled out on the sand.
Most of the big shore places were closed now and there were hardly any lights except the shadowy, moving glow of a ferryboat across the Sound.
And as the moon rose higher the inessential houses began to melt away until gradually I became aware of the old island here that flowered once for Dutch sailors' eyes - a fresh, green breast of the new world.
Its vanished trees, the trees that had made way for Gatsby's house, had once pandered in whispers to the last and greatest of all human dreams; for a transitory enchanted moment man must have held his breath in the presence of this continent, compelled into an aesthetic contemplation he neither understood nor desired, face to face for the last time in history with something commensurate to his capacity for wonder.
And as I sat there brooding on the old, unknown world, I thought of Gatsby's wonder when he first picked out the green light at the end of Daisy's dock.
He had come a long way to this blue lawn, and his dream must have seemed so close that he could hardly fail to grasp it.
He did not know that it was already behind him, somewhere back in that vast obscurity beyond the city, were the dark fields of the republic rolled on under the night.
Gatsby believed in the green light, the orgiastic future that year by year recedes before us.
It eluded us then, but that's no matter - tomorrow we will run faster, stretch out our arms farther... And one fine morning -
So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into the past.
" Never," said he, as he ground his teeth, "never was anything at once so frail and so indomitable.
A mere reed she feels in my hand!" (
And he shook me with the force of his hold.) "
I could bend her with my finger and thumb: and what good would it do if I bent, if I uptore, if I crushed her?
Consider that eye: consider the resolute, wild, free thing looking out of it, defying me, with more than courage - with a stern triumph.
Whatever I do with its cage, I cannot get at it - the savage, beautiful creature!
If I tear, if I rend the slight prison, my outrage will only let the captive loose.
Conqueror I might be of the house; but the inmate would escape to heaven before I could call myself possessor of its clay dwelling-place.
And it is you, spirit - with will and energy, and virtue and purity - that I want: not alone your brittle frame.
Of yourself you could come with soft flight and nestle against my heart, if you would: seized against your will, you will elude the grasp like an essence - you will vanish ere I inhale your fragrance.
Oh!
come, Jane, come! "
As he said this, he released me from his clutch, and only looked at me.
The look was far worse to resist than the frantic strain: only an idiot, however, would have succumbed now.
I had dared and baffled his fury; I must elude his sorrow: I retired to the door.
" You are going, Jane? "
" I am going, sir. "
" You are leaving me? "
"Yes. "
" You will not come?
You will not be my comforter, my rescuer?
My deep love, my wild woe, my frantic prayer, are all nothing to you? "
What unutterable pathos was in his voice!
How hard it was to reiterate firmly, "I am going. "
"Jane! "
" Mr. Rochester! "
" Withdraw, then, - I consent; but remember, you leave me here in anguish.
Go up to your own room; think over all I have said, and, Jane, cast a glance on my sufferings - think of me. "
He turned away; he threw himself on his face on the sofa. "
Oh, Jane!
my hope - my love - my life! "
broke in anguish from his lips.
Then came a deep, strong sob.
I had already gained the door; but, reader, I walked back - walked back as determinedly as I had retreated.
I knelt down by him; I turned his face from the cushion to me; I kissed his cheek; I smoothed his hair with my hand.
" God bless you, my dear master!"
I said. "
God keep you from harm and wrong - direct you, solace you - reward you well for your past kindness to me. "
" Little Jane's love would have been my best reward," he answered; "without it, my heart is broken.
But Jane will give me her love: yes - nobly, generously. "
Up the blood rushed to his face; forth flashed the fire from his eyes; erect he sprang; he held his arms out; but I evaded the embrace, and at once quitted the room.
"Farewell!"
was the cry of my heart as I left him.
Despair added, "Farewell for ever! "
There are too many treasures in life we take for granted, the worth of which we don't fully realize until they're pointed out to us in some unexpected way.
So it was with Mama's soup pot.
I can still see it sitting on the stove in all its chipped white-and-blue-enameled glory, its contents bubbling, steam rising as if from an active volcano.
When I entered the back porch, the aroma was not only mouthwatering but reassuring.
Whether Mama was standing over the pot stirring with a long wooden spoon or not, I knew I was home.
There was no recipe for her minestrone soup.
It was always a work in progress.
It had been so since her girlhood in the Piemonte mountains of northern Italy, where she learned its secret from her nonna (Italian, grandma), who had inherited it from generations of nonnas.
For our large immigrant family, Mama's soup guaranteed we would never go hungry.
It was a simmering symbol of security.
Its recipe was created spontaneously from what was in the kitchen.
And we could judge the state of our family economy by its contents.
A thick brew with tomatoes, pasta, beans, carrots, celery, onion, corn and meat indicated things were going well with the Buscaglias.
A watery soup denoted meager times.
And never was food thrown out.
That was a sin against God.
Everything ended up in the minestrone pot.
Its preparation was sacred to Mama.
To her, cooking was a celebration of God's providence.
Each potato, each shred of chicken was placed in the pot with grateful thanks.
I think of Mama whenever I read Proverbs, "She gets up while it is still dark; she provides food for her family. "
At one time, however, Mama's soup pot became a source of embarrassment to me, for I feared it would cost me a new friend I had made at school.
Sol was a thin, dark-haired boy, and an unusual pal for me because his father was a doctor and they lived in the best part of town.
Often Sol invited me to his home for dinner.
The family had a cook in a white uniform who worked in a kitchen of gleaming chrome and shining utensils.
The food was good, but I found it bland, lacking the heartiness of my home fare served from flame-blackened pots.
Moreover, the atmosphere matched the food.
Everything was so formal.
Sol's mother and father were polite, but conversation around the table was stilted and subdued.
And no one hugged!
The closest I saw Sol get to his father was a handshake.
In our family, warm hugs were constant - men, women, boys and girls - and if you didn't kiss your mother, she demanded, "What's a matter, you sick? "
But at that time in my life, all this was an embarrassment.
I had known Sol would like to eat dinner at our house, but that was the last thing I wanted.
My family was so different.
No other kids had such pots on their stoves, nor did they have a mama whose first action upon seeing you enter the house was to sit you down with a spoon and bowl. "
People in America don't do things like that," I tried to convince Mama.
" Well, I'm not people," was her proud retort. "
I'm Rosina.
Only crazy people don't want my minestrone. "
Finally Sol pointedly asked if he could come to our house.
I had to say yes.
I knew nothing would make Mama happier.
But I was in a state of anxiety.
Eating with my family would turn Sol off completely, I believed.
" Mama, why can't we have some American food like hamburgers or fried chicken? "
She fixed me with a stony glare and I knew better than to ask again.
The day Sol came over I was a nervous wreck.
Mama and the other nine family members welcomed him with embraces and slaps on the back.
Soon we were sitting at the heavy, deeply stained and ornately carved table that was Papa's pride and joy.
It was covered with an ostentatious, bright oilcloth.
And sure enough, after Papa asked the blessing, we were instantly faced with bowls of soup.
" Eh, Sol," Mama asked, "you know what this is? "
"Soup?"
Sol responded.
" No soup," Mama said emphatically. "
It's minestrone! "
She then launched into a long, animated explanation of the power of minestrone: how it cured headaches, colds, heartaches, indigestion, gout and liver ailments.
After feeling Sol's muscles, Mama convinced him that the soup would also make him strong, like the Italian-American hero Charles Atlas.
I cringed, convinced that this would be the last time I would ever see my friend Sol.
He would certainly never return to a home with such eccentric people - odd accents and strange food.
But to my amazement, Sol politely finished his bowl and then asked for two more. "
I like it a lot," he said, slurping.
When we were saying our goodbyes, Sol confided, "You sure have a great family.
I wish my mom could cook that good. "
Then he added, "Boy, are you lucky! "
Lucky?
I wondered, as he walked down the street waving and smiling.
Today I know how lucky I was.
I know that the glow Sol experienced at our table was much more than the physical and spiritual warmth of Mama's minestrone.
It was the unalloyed joy of a family table where the real feast was love.
Mama died a long time ago.
Someone turned off the gas under the minestrone pot the day after Mama was buried, and a glorious era passed with the flame.
But the godly love and assurance that bubbled amidst its savory ingredients still warms my heart today.
Sol and I continued our friendship through the years.
I was the best man at his wedding.
Not long ago I visited his house for dinner.
He hugged all his children and they hugged me.
Then his wife brought out steaming bowls of soup.
It was chicken soup, thick with vegetables and chunks of meat.
" Hey, Leo ," Sol asked, "do you know what this is? "
"Soup? "
I responded smiling.
"Soup! "
he huffed. "
This is chicken soup!
Cures colds, headaches, indigestion.
Good for your liver!"
Sol winked.
I felt I was home again.
Alice sits on the bedroom floor among the half-packed suitcases, with her lists.
This is her job, one of many.
Always has been.
Everyone else's last minute packing - "Alice, don't forget my electric shaver. " - "
Mum, I need more bikinis. "
When did this become my job, Alice wonders.
And when did I stop becoming someone and become, instead, something?
Alice abandons the packing and makes a new list - Things That Alice Has Become:
Wife (Considerate.
Tolerant.
Understanding.)
Sex goddess (Sometimes.)
Domestic goddess (Move over, Nigella.)
Mum (A good one.
The best.
Always there.
A rock during times of extreme stress.)
Grandma (Alice dismisses this one quickly.
She won't even think about the grandma title that they're attempting to hang on her.)
Resist.
Resist.
Too young.
Not ready.
Fifty is the new 40.
Alice read that yesterday in her paper.
Which means that on her birthday, in three days' time, she is only 30.
She likes that.
Likes the time and the freedom it gives her.
What Alice isn't happy with is the holiday.
The holiday Mark has presented her with.
"Surprise.
For you birthday.
All of us.
Zoe is bringing a friend.
Tom's bringing his girlfriend and the little boy. " (
They will ask me to babysit, Alice thinks.)
" Oh, and Mum's coming as well.
It will be company for you. "
Alice said nothing.
She couldn't.
Mark's mum had rung to say that she had it all planned.
Local architecture.
A cathedral. "
You know I'm not one for sitting in the sun. "
But I am, Alice thought.
I am.
Mark is home now and raring to go. "
Aren't you packed yet, Alice? "
he says, stripping off and heading for the shower.
" I am," she says.
Her case is ready in the corner.
She watches his naked body disappear.
A good body.
A good man, but selfish.
Alice stuffs clothes in cases.
She thinks about unfolding the sunbed in her own back garden and sleeping in the hot sun.
She thinks about the books she has packed and will not read and she slams the last suitcase shut in anger.
On the way to the airport they pick up Mark's mum.
At check-in there are no delays.
Mark looks smug, as though he has planned this to order as well.
But...there is a problem.
A missing passport.
"Alice!" "
Mum!" "
How could you? "
Mouths are open.
The mother-in-law shakes her head.
An airline representative, well used to such a crisis, steps in to try and make it better.
There is another flight on Wednesday.
Perhaps Alice can come back then?
Perhaps she can follow on and join them later?
Alice closes her eyes.
Thinks of the peace in her back garden, of the little sunny spot, and of chilled champagne.
She wonders which book she will read first.
She smiles.
Even the cat is in the cattery.
She waves them off.
Mark is still frowning.
" What a silly thing to do," Mark says to her. "
How could you forget your passport?
You have never done this before.
Do you even know where it is? "
Well, yes, she knows exactly where it is.
It's in the front pocket of her suitcase that is still sitting in the corner of the bedroom.
She waves until they disappear.
Mark is the last to go. "
See you soon," he mouths.
Perhaps, Alice thinks, perhaps.
Two weeks lie ahead of her like an open road, like freedom.
Now it feels like a holiday.
And she sings along to the songs on the radio as she heads home.
She even gets to choose the radio station.
Now that's a first, she thinks.
Happy birthday, Alice.
Happy holidays.
If I fall in love with you -
I will never resemble clambering trumpet creeper,
To flaunt myself by your high branches.
If I fall in love with you -
I will never imitate spoony birds,
To repeat simple songs for green shade.
I will not only resemble a wellspring,
To bring you cool consolation perennially;
I will not only resemble steepy mountains,
To increase your altitude or set off your dignified manner.
Even not only sunlight,
Even not only spring rain,
No, these are not enough!
I must be a kapok beside you,
As an image of tree I stand with you.
Our roots hold tightly in the earth,
Our leaves touch gently in the clouds.
As each breeze passes, we salute each other,
But no one can understand our own words.
You have your iron trunk and copper branch
Like a knife, a sword and a halberd as well;
I have my red and big flowers,
Like a heavy sigh and a heroic torch as well.
Together we partake cold waves, storms and firebolts;
Together we share fogs, flowing hazes and rainbows,
We seem always apart, but interdependent all life long.
Only this is great love,
Faithfulness lies here:
I love not only your gigantic stature,
But also the position you uphold,
And the earth on which you stand.
Night after night, she came to tuck me in, even long after my childhood years.
Following her long-standing custom, she'd lean down and push my long hair out of the way, then kiss my forehead.
I don't remember when it first started annoying me - her hands pushing my hair that way.
But it did annoy me, for they felt work-worn and rough against my young skin.
Finally, one night, I lashed out at her: "Don't do that anymore - your hands are too rough! "
She didn't say anything in reply.
But never again did my mother close out my day with that familiar expression of her love.
Lying awake long afterward, my words haunted me.
But pride stifled my conscience, and I didn't tell her I was sorry.
Time after time, with the passing years, my thoughts returned to that night.
By then I missed my mother's hands, missed her goodnight kiss upon my forehead.
Sometimes the incident seemed very close, sometimes far away.
But always it lurked, hauntingly, in the back of my mind.
Well, the years have passed, and I'm not a little girl anymore.
Mom is in her mid-seventies, and those hands I once thought to be so rough are still doing things for me and my family.
She's been our doctor, reaching into a medicine cabinet for the remedy to calm a young girl's stomach or soothe a boy's scraped knee.
She cooks the best fried chicken in the world...gets stains out of blue jeans like I never could... and still insists on dishing out ice cream at any hour of the day or night.
Through the years, my mother's hands have put in countless hours of toil, and most of hers were before automatic washers!
Now, my own children are grown and gone.
Mom no longer has Dad, and on special occasions, I find myself drawn next door to spend the night with her.
So it was that late one Thanksgiving Eve, as I drifted into sleep in the bedroom of my youth, a familiar hand hesitantly stole across my face to brush the hair from my forehead.
Then a kiss, ever so gently, touched my brow.
In my memory, for the thousandth time, I recalled the night my surly young voice complained: "Don't do that anymore - your hands are too rough! "
Catching Mom's hand in mine, I blurted out how sorry I was for that night.
I thought she'd remember, as I did.
But Mom didn't know what I was talking about.
She had forgotten - and forgiven - long ago.
That night, I fell asleep with a new appreciation for my gentle mother and her caring hands.
And the guilt I had carried around for so long was nowhere to be found.
Happy, happy, never-returning time of childhood!
How can we help loving and dwelling upon its recollections?
They cheer and elevate the soul, and become to one a source of higher joys.
Sometimes, when dreaming of bygone days, I fancy that, tired out with running about, I have sat down, as of old, in my high armchair by the tea-table.
It is late, and I have long since drunk my cup of milk.
My eyes are heavy with sleep as I sit there and listen.
How could I not listen, seeing that Mamma is speaking to somebody, and that the sound of her voice is so melodious and kind?
How much its echoes recall to my heart!
With my eyes veiled with drowsiness I gaze at her wistfully.
Suddenly she seems to grow smaller and smaller, and her face vanishes to a point; yet I can still see it - can still see her as she looks at me and smiles.
Somehow it pleases me to see her grown so small.
I blink and blink, yet she looks no larger than a boy reflected in the pupil of an eye.
Then I rouse myself, and the picture fades.
Once more I half-close my eyes, and cast about to try and recall the dream, but it has gone.
I rise to my feet, only to fall back comfortably into the armchair.
" There!
You are falling asleep again, little Nicolas," says Mamma. "
You had better go to by-by. "
" No, I won't go to sleep, Mamma," I reply, though almost inaudibly, for pleasant dreams are filling all my soul.
The sound sleep of childhood is weighing my eyelids down, and for a few moments I sink into slumber and oblivion until awakened by someone.
I feel in my sleep as though a soft hand were caressing me.
I know it by the touch, and, though still dreaming, I seize hold of it and press it to my lips.
Everyone else has gone to bed, and only one candle remains burning in the drawing-room.
Mamma has said that she herself will wake me.
She sits down on the arm of the chair in which I am asleep, with her soft hand stroking my hair, and I hear her beloved, well-known voice say in my ear, "Get up, my darling.
It is time to go by-by. "
No envious gaze sees her now.
She is not afraid to shed upon me the whole of her tenderness and love.
I do not wake up, yet I kiss and kiss her hand.
"Get up, then, my angel. "
She passes her other arm around my neck, and her fingers tickle me as they move across it.
The room is quiet and in half-darkness, but the tickling has touched my nerves and I begin to awake.
Mamma is sitting near me - that I can tell - and touching me ; I can hear her voice and feel her presence.
This at last rouses me to spring up, to throw my arms around her neck, to hide my head in her bosom, and to say with a sigh, "Ah, dear, darling Mamma, how much I love you! "
She smiles her sad, enchanting smile, takes my head between her two hands, kisses me on the forehead, and lifts me on to her lap. "
Do you love me so much, then? "
she says.
Then, after a few moments' silence, she continues, "And you must love me always, and never forget me.
If your Mamma should no longer be here, will you promise never to forget her - never, Nicolas? "
and she kisses me more fondly than ever.
" Oh, but you must not speak so, darling Mamma, my own darling Mamma!"
I exclaim as I clasp her knees, and tears of joy and love fall from my eyes.
How, after scenes like this, I would go upstairs, and stand before the icons, and say with a rapturous feeling, "God bless Papa and Mamma!"
and repeat a prayer for my beloved mother which my childish lips had learnt to lisp - the love of God and of her blending strangely in a single emotion!
After saying my prayers I would wrap myself up in the bedclothes.
My heart would feel light, peaceful, and happy, and one dream would follow another.
Dreams of what?
They were all of them vague, but all of them full of pure love and of a sort of expectation of happiness.
Usually, also, there would be some favorite toy - a china dog or hare - stuck into the bed-corner behind the pillow, and it would please me to think how warm and comfortable and well cared-for it was there.
Also, I would pray God to make everyone happy, so that everyone might be contented, and also to send fine weather tomorrow for our walk.
Then I would turn myself over on to the other side, and thoughts and dreams would become jumbled and entangled together until at last I slept soundly and peacefully, though with a face wet with tears.
Do in after life the freshness and lightheartedness, the craving for love and for strength of faith, ever return which we experience in our childhood's years?
What better time is there in our lives than when the two best of virtues - innocent gaiety and a boundless yearning for affection - are our sole objects of pursuit?
Where now are our ardent prayers?
Where now are our best gifts - the pure tears of emotion which a guardian angel dries with a smile as he sheds upon us lovely dreams of ineffable childish joy?
Can it be that life has left such heavy traces upon one's heart that those tears and ecstasies are for ever vanished?
Can it be that there remains to us only the recollection of them?
A long time ago, there was a huge apple tree.
A little boy loved to come and play around it every day.
He climbed to the treetop, ate the apples, took a nap under the shadow... he loved the tree and the tree loved to play with him.
Time went by... the little boy had grown up and he no longer played around the tree.
One day, the boy came back to the tree and looked sad. "
Come and play with me," the tree asked the boy.
" I am no longer a kid; I don't play around trees anymore," the boy replied. "
I want toys.
I need money to buy them. "
"Sorry, but I don't have money... but you can pick all my apples and sell them.
So, you will have money. "
The boy was so excited.
He picked all the apples on the tree and left happily.
The boy didn't come back after he picked the apples.
The tree was sad.
One day, the boy returned and the tree was so excited. "
Come and play with me," the tree said.
" I don't have time to play.
I have to work for my family.
We need a house for shelter.
Can you help me?" "
Sorry, I don't have a house.
But you can cut off my branches to build your house. "
So the boy cut all the branches of the tree and left happily.
The tree was glad to see him happy but the boy didn't appear since then.
The tree was again lonely and sad.
One hot summer day, the boy returned and the tree was delighted. "
Come and play with me!"
the tree said.
" I am sad and getting old.
I want to go sailing to relax myself.
Can you give me a boat?" "
Use my trunk to build the boat.
You can sail and be happy. "
So the boy cut the tree trunk to make a boat.
He went sailing and did not show up for a long time.
Finally, the boy returned after he left for so many years. "
Sorry, my boy.
But I don't have anything for you any more.
No more apples for you," the tree said. "
I don't have teeth to bite," the boy replied. "
No more trunk for you to climb on. " "
I am too old for that now," the boy said. "
I really want to give you something...the only thing left is my dying roots," the tree said with tears. "
I don't need much now, just a place to rest.
I am tired after all these years," the boy replied. "
Good!
Old tree roots are the best place to lean on and rest.
Come here, please sit down with me and have a rest. "
The boy sat down and the tree was glad and smiled with tears...
This is a story of everyone.
The tree is our parents.
When we were young, we loved to play with Mom and Dad.
When we grow up, we leave them, and only come to them when we need something or when we are in trouble.
No matter what, parents will always be there and give everything they could to make you happy.
You may think that the boy is cruel to the tree but that's how all of us are treating our parents.
Our daughter, Michelle was born in 1966.
She's a redhead with a temperament to match.
She had an older brother and, in quick order, two younger brothers.
They delighted in teasing her, and she had a habit of overreacting to their every move.
Our days were full of Michelle's crying and screaming and, I'm ashamed to admit, my yelling from some part of the house, "Michelle, stop screaming! "
A fine example of "Do as I say, not as I do. "
In 1969, my husband and I attended a seminar and were introduced to Norman Vincent Peale's book, The Power of Positive Thinking.
What a revelation it was!
I have always been of the opinion that you immediately recognize truth when you hear it, and that's how I felt when I heard the logic and the scriptural basis for The Power of Positive Thinking.
I came home excited and determined to change the negatives in my life to positive.
Well, it wasn't long before Michelle was crying her eyes out about something.
I was about to begin my mantra of "Michelle , I swear, you are the unhappiest little girl I have ever seen. "
Instead, I said, "Here she comes, my happy little girl. "
She crawled up on a small stool next to the stove where I was stirring ingredients into the pot of soup I was fixing for supper.
There she stood, wailing at the top of her lungs.
I fixed a big grin on my face, tapped the oversize spoon on the edge of the pot, wagged it at her and said, "I know there's a smile in there.
I know there is.
There it comes, right from her tummy.
Uh-oh, here it comes," drawing the spoon through the air from the area in front of her tummy, higher and higher toward her wide-open mouth. "
Here it comes.
It's almost to her face. "
She continued to howl.
Undeterred, I stirred the soup and then went through the process again. "
This can't be my happy little girl.
I just know there's a giggle in there trying to get out. "
Once more I drew the spoon through the air mimicking a path from her tummy to her face.
It took two or three times, but suddenly she stood there laughing through her tears.
She couldn't help but giggle at her mom's ridiculous assumption, I guess.
From that time forward, I never told her she was crabby or unhappy or a whiner.
I always introduced her to others as the sunshine in our family.
" Michelle always has a smile," I'd say, "even when someone treats her badly. "
It wasn't overnight, I assure you.
Many were the times when my nerves were already frazzled and I was pressed for enough hours in the day to get everything done.
Sure enough, someone would cross Michelle or she would have something go wrong and she'd come bawling to me.
I'd take a deep breath, say a little prayer, and go through my routine.
She always ended up laughing.
If she had a real problem, we could then take care of it.
The payoff was when I went for her third-grade parent-teacher conference.
The teacher began with "Michelle is a delight in the classroom.
She has a smile for everyone.
Another child can pick on her during recess, but by the time they're back in the room, Michelle is all in happiness, even inviting the offending classmate to join her group.
I've never seen anything like it. "
Do positive thinking and prayer bring results?
You bet they do!
Have there been any repercussions from my homemade solution?
Well, I can think of one.
One day when Michelle was about 16 and all the children were teenagers, I was having a very bad time.
On the way to my bedroom to have a good cry, I walked through the living room.
Michelle saw me covering my face with my hands, sobbing.
She jumped out of her chair and leapt in front of me.
Walking backwards, she began saying, "Is this my happy Mom?
I know there's a smile in there just trying to get out. "
I tried to hit her hand away from me, telling her this wasn't the time for foolishness.
She persisted. "
There it is.
It's coming up from her tummy.
It's almost to her face.
Here it comes. "
I couldn't help it.
I began to laugh through my tears.
Mother, the light has grown grey in the sky; I do not know what the time is.
There is no fun in my play, so I have come to you.
It is Saturday, our holiday.
Leave off your work, mother; sit here by the window and tell me where the desert of Tepāntar in the fairy tale is?
The shadow of the rains has covered the day from end to end.
The fierce lightning is scratching the sky with its nails.
When the clouds rumble and it thunders, I love to be afraid in my heart and cling to you.
When the heavy rain patters for hours on the bamboo leaves, and our windows shake and rattle at the gusts of wind, I like to sit alone in the room, mother, with you, and hear you talk about the desert of Tepāntar in the fairy tale.
Where is it, mother, on the shore of what sea, at the foot of what hills, in the kingdom of what king?
There are no hedges there to mark the fields, no footpath across it by which the villagers reach their village in the evening, or the woman who gathers dry sticks in the forest can bring her load to the market.
With patches of yellow grass in the sand and only one tree where the pair of wise old birds have their nest, lies the desert of Tepāntar.
I can imagine how, on just such a cloudy day, the young son of the king is riding alone on a grey horse through the desert, in search of the princess who lies imprisoned in the giant's palace across that unknown water.
When the haze of the rain comes down in the distant sky, and lightning starts up like a sudden fit of pain, does he remember his unhappy mother, abandoned by the king, sweeping the cow-stall and wiping her eyes, while he rides through the desert of Tepāntar in the fairy tale?
See, mother, it is almost dark before the day is over, and there are no travellers yonder on the village road.
The shepherd boy has gone home early from the pasture, and men have left their fields to sit on mats under the eaves of their huts, watching the scowling clouds.
Mother, I have left all my books on the shelf - do not ask me to do my lessons now.
When I grow up and am big like my father, I shall learn all that must be learnt.
But just for to-day, tell me, mother, where the desert of Tepāntar in the fairy tale is?