Thursday, 2d.
LAST night my father took me to see the evening schools in our Baretti schoolhouse, which were all lighted up already, and where the workingmen were already beginning to enter.
On our arrival we found the head-master and the other masters in a great rage, because a little while before the glass in one window had been broken by a stone.
The beadle had darted forth and seized a boy by the hair, who was passing; but thereupon, Stardi, who lives in the house opposite, had presented himself, and said:-
"This is not the right one; I saw it with my own eyes; it was Franti who threw it; and he said to me, 'Woe to you if you tell of me!'
but I am not afraid."
Then the head-master declared that Franti should be expelled for good.
In the meantime I was watching the workingmen enter by twos and threes; and more than two hundred had already entered.
I have never seen anything so fine as the evening school.
There were boys of twelve and upwards; bearded men who were on their way from their work, carrying their books and copy-books; there were carpenters, engineers with black faces, masons with hands white with plaster, bakers' boys with their hair full of flour; and there was perceptible the odor of varnish, hides, fish, oil,-odors of all the various trades.
There also entered a squad of artillery workmen, dressed like soldiers and headed by a corporal.
They all filed briskly to their benches, removed the board underneath, on which we put our feet, and immediately bent their heads over their work.
Some stepped up to the teachers to ask explanations, with their open copy-books in their hands.
I caught sight of that young and well-dressed master "the little lawyer," who had three or four workingmen clustered round his table, and was making corrections with his pen; and also the lame one, who was laughing with a dyer who had brought him a copy-book all adorned with red and blue dyes.
My master, who had recovered, and who will return to school to-morrow, was there also.
The doors of the schoolroom were open.
I was amazed, when the lessons began, to see how attentive they all were, and how they kept their eyes fixed on their work.
Yet the greater part of them, so the head-master said, for fear of being late, had not even been home to eat a mouthful of supper, and they were hungry.
But the younger ones, after half an hour of school, were falling off the benches with sleep; one even went fast asleep with his head on the bench, and the master waked him up by poking his ear with a pen.
But the grown-up men did nothing of the sort; they kept awake, and listened, with their mouths wide open, to the lesson, without even winking; and it made a deep impression on me to see all those bearded men on our benches.
We also ascended to the story floor above, and I ran to the door of my schoolroom and saw in my seat a man with a big mustache and a bandaged hand, who might have injured himself while at work about some machine; but he was trying to write, though very, very slowly.
But what pleased me most was to behold in the seat of the little mason, on the very same bench and in the very same corner, his father, the mason, as huge as a giant, who sat there all coiled up into a narrow space, with his chin on his fists and his eyes on his book, so absorbed that he hardly breathed.
And there was no chance about it, for it was he himself who said to the head-master the first evening he came to the school:-
"Signor Director, do me the favor to place me in the seat of 'my hare's face.'"
For he always calls his son so.
My father kept me there until the end, and in the street we saw many women with children in their arms, waiting for their husbands; and at the entrance a change was effected: the husbands took the children in their arms, and the women made them surrender their books and copy-books; and in this wise they proceeded to their homes.
For several minutes the street was filled with people and with noise.
Then all grew silent, and all we could see was the tall and weary form of the head-master disappearing in the distance.
Sunday, 5th.
It was what might have been expected.
Franti, on being expelled by the head-master, wanted to revenge himself on Stardi, and he waited for Stardi at a corner, when he came out of school, and when the latter was passing with his sister, whom he escorts every day from an institution in the Via Dora Grossa.
My sister Silvia, on emerging from her schoolhouse, witnessed the whole affair, and came home thoroughly terrified.
This is what took place.
Franti, with his cap of waxed cloth canted over one ear, ran up on tiptoe behind Stardi, and in order to provoke him, gave a tug at his sister's braid of hair,-a tug so violent that it almost threw the girl flat on her back on the ground.
The little girl uttered a cry; her brother whirled round; Franti, who is much taller and stronger than Stardi, thought:-
"He'll not utter a word, or I'll break his skin for him!"
But Stardi never paused to reflect, and small and ill-made as he is, he flung himself with one bound on that big fellow, and began to belabor him with his fists.
He could not hold his own, however, and he got more than he gave.
There was no one in the street but girls, so there was no one who could separate them.
Franti flung him on the ground; but the other instantly got up, and then down he went on his back again, and Franti pounded away as though upon a door: in an instant he had torn away half an ear, and bruised one eye, and drawn blood from the other's nose.
But Stardi was tenacious; he roared:-
"You may kill me, but I'll make you pay for it!"
And down went Franti, kicking and cuffing, and Stardi under him, butting and lungeing out with his heels.
A woman shrieked from a window, "Good for the little one!"
Others said, "It is a boy defending his sister; courage!
give it to him well!"
And they screamed at Franti, "You overbearing brute!
you coward!"
But Franti had grown ferocious; he held out his leg; Stardi tripped and fell, and Franti on top of him.
"Surrender!"-"No!"-"Surrender!"-"No!"
and in a flash Stardi recovered his feet, clasped Franti by the body, and, with one furious effort, hurled him on the pavement, and fell upon him with one knee on his breast.
"Ah, the infamous fellow!
he has a knife!"
shouted a man, rushing up to disarm Franti.
But Stardi, beside himself with rage, had already grasped Franti's arm with both hands, and bestowed on the fist such a bite that the knife fell from it, and the hand began to bleed.
More people had run up in the meantime, who separated them and set them on their feet.
Franti took to his heels in a sorry plight, and Stardi stood still, with his face all scratched, and a black eye,-but triumphant,-beside his weeping sister, while some of the girls collected the books and copy-books which were strewn over the street.
"Bravo, little fellow!"
said the bystanders; "he defended his sister!"
But Stardi, who was thinking more of his satchel than of his victory, instantly set to examining the books and copy-books, one by one, to see whether anything was missing or injured.
He rubbed them off with his sleeve, scrutinized his pen, put everything back in its place, and then, tranquil and serious as usual, he said to his sister, "Let us go home quickly, for I have a problem to solve."
Monday, 6th.
This morning big Stardi, the father, came to wait for his son, fearing lest he should again encounter Franti.
But they say that Franti will not be seen again, because he will be put in the penitentiary.
There were a great many parents there this morning.
Among the rest there was the retail wood-dealer, the father of Coretti, the perfect image of his son, slender, brisk, with his mustache brought to a point, and a ribbon of two colors in the button-hole of his jacket.
I know nearly all the parents of the boys, through constantly seeing them there.
There is one crooked grandmother, with her white cap, who comes four times a day, whether it rains or snows or storms, to accompany and to get her little grandson, of the upper primary; and she takes off his little cloak and puts it on for him, adjusts his necktie, brushes off the dust, polishes him up, and takes care of the copy-books.
It is evident that she has no other thought, that she sees nothing in the world more beautiful.
The captain of artillery also comes frequently, the father of Robetti, the lad with the crutches, who saved a child from the omnibus, and as all his son's companions bestow a caress on him in passing, he returns a caress or a salute to every one, and he never forgets any one; he bends over all, and the poorer and more badly dressed they are, the more pleased he seems to be, and he thanks them.
At times, however, sad sights are to be seen.
A gentleman who had not come for a month because one of his sons had died, and who had sent a maidservant for the other, on returning yesterday and beholding the class, the comrades of his little dead boy, retired into a corner and burst into sobs, with both hands before his face, and the head-master took him by the arm and led him to his office.
There are fathers and mothers who know all their sons' companions by name.
There are girls from the neighboring schoolhouse, and scholars in the gymnasium, who come to wait for their brothers.
There is one old gentleman who was a colonel formerly, and who, when a boy drops a copy-book or a pen, picks it up for him.
There are also to be seen well-dressed men, who discuss school matters with others, who have kerchiefs on their heads, and baskets on their arm, and who say:-
"Oh!
the problem has been a difficult one this time.
"-"That grammar lesson will never come to an end this morning!"
And when there is a sick boy in the class, they all know it; when a sick boy is convalescent, they all rejoice.
And this morning there were eight or ten gentlemen and workingmen standing around Crossi's mother, the vegetable-vender, making inquiries about a poor baby in my brother's class, who lives in her court, and who is in danger of his life.
The school seems to make them all equals and friends.
Wednesday, 8th.
I witnessed a touching scene yesterday afternoon.
For several days, every time that the vegetable-vender has passed Derossi she has gazed and gazed at him with an expression of great affection; for Derossi, since he made the discovery about that inkstand and prisoner Number 78, has acquired a love for her son, Crossi, the red-haired boy with the useless arm; and he helps him to do his work in school, suggests answers to him, gives him paper, pens, and pencils; in short, he behaves to him like a brother, as though to compensate him for his father's misfortune, which has affected him, although he does not know it.
The vegetable-vender had been gazing at Derossi for several days, and she seemed loath to take her eyes from him, for she is a good woman who lives only for her son; and Derossi, who assists him and makes him appear well, Derossi, who is a gentleman and the head of the school, seems to her a king, a saint.
She continued to stare at him, and seemed desirous of saying something to him, yet ashamed to do it.
But at last, yesterday morning, she took courage, stopped him in front of a gate, and said to him:-
"I beg a thousand pardons, little master!
Will you, who are so kind to my son, and so fond of him, do me the favor to accept this little memento from a poor mother?"
and she pulled out of her vegetable-basket a little pasteboard box of white and gold.
Derossi flushed up all over, and refused, saying with decision:-
"Give it to your son; I will accept nothing."
The woman was mortified, and stammered an excuse:-
"I had no idea of offending you.
It is only caramels."
But Derossi said "no," again, and shook his head.
Then she timidly lifted from her basket a bunch of radishes, and said:-
"Accept these at least,-they are fresh,-and carry them to your mamma."
Derossi smiled, and said:-
"No, thanks: I don't want anything; I shall always do all that I can for Crossi, but I cannot accept anything.
I thank you all the same."
"But you are not at all offended?"
asked the woman, anxiously.
Derossi said "No, no!"
smiled, and went off, while she exclaimed, in great delight:-
"Oh, what a good boy!
I have never seen so fine and handsome a boy as he!"
And that appeared to be the end of it.
But in the afternoon, at four o'clock, instead of Crossi's mother, his father approached, with that gaunt and melancholy face of his.
He stopped Derossi, and from the way in which he looked at the latter I instantly understood that he suspected Derossi of knowing his secret.
He looked at him intently, and said in his sorrowful, affectionate voice:-
"You are fond of my son.
Why do you like him so much?"
Derossi's face turned the color of fire.
He would have liked to say: "I am fond of him because he has been unfortunate; because you, his father, have been more unfortunate than guilty, and have nobly expiated your crime, and are a man of heart."
But he had not the courage to say it, for at bottom he still felt fear and almost loathing in the presence of this man who had shed another's blood, and had been six years in prison.
But the latter divined it all, and lowering his voice, he said in Derossi's ear, almost trembling the while:-
"You love the son; but you do not hate, do not wholly despise the father, do you?"
"Ah, no, no!
Quite the reverse!"
exclaimed Derossi, with a soulful impulse.
And then the man made an impetuous movement, as though to throw one arm round his neck; but he dared not, and instead he took one of the lad's golden curls between two of his fingers, smoothed it out, and released it; then he placed his hand on his mouth and kissed his palm, gazing at Derossi with moist eyes, as though to say that this kiss was for him.
Then he took his son by the hand, and went away at a rapid pace.
Monday, 13th.
The little boy who lived in the vegetable-vender's court, the one who belonged to the upper primary, and was the companion of my brother, is dead.
Schoolmistress Delcati came in great affliction, on Saturday afternoon, to inform the master of it; and instantly Garrone and Coretti volunteered to carry the coffin.
He was a fine little lad.
He had won the medal last week.
He was fond of my brother, and he had presented him with a broken money-box.
My mother always caressed him when she met him.
He wore a cap with two stripes of red cloth.
His father is a porter on the railway.
Yesterday (Sunday) afternoon, at half-past four o'clock, we went to his house, to accompany him to the church.
They live on the ground floor.
Many boys of the upper primary, with their mothers, all holding candles, and five or six teachers and several neighbors were already collected in the courtyard.
The mistress with the red feather and Signora Delcati had gone inside, and through an open window we beheld them weeping.
We could hear the mother of the child sobbing loudly.
Two ladies, mothers of two school companions of the dead child, had brought two garlands of flowers.
Exactly at five o'clock we set out.
In front went a boy carrying a cross, then a priest, then the coffin,-a very, very small coffin, poor child!-covered with a black cloth, and round it were wound the garlands of flowers brought by the two ladies.
On the black cloth, on one side, were fastened the medal and honorable mentions which the little boy had won in the course of the year.
Garrone, Coretti, and two boys from the courtyard bore the coffin.
Behind the coffin, first came Signora Delcati, who wept as though the little dead boy were her own; behind her the other schoolmistresses; and behind the mistresses, the boys, among whom were some very little ones, who carried bunches of violets in one hand, and who stared in amazement at the bier, while their other hand was held by their mothers, who carried candles.
I heard one of them say, "And shall I not see him at school again?"
When the coffin emerged from the court, a despairing cry was heard from the window.
It was the child's mother; but they made her draw back into the room immediately.
On arriving in the street, we met the boys from a college, who were passing in double file, and on catching sight of the coffin with the medal and the schoolmistresses, they all pulled off their hats.
Poor little boy!
he went to sleep forever with his medal.
We shall never see his red cap again.
He was in perfect health; in four days he was dead.
On the last day he made an effort to rise and do his little task in nomenclature, and he insisted on keeping his medal on his bed for fear it would be taken from him.
No one will ever take it from you again, poor boy!
Farewell, farewell!
We shall always remember thee at the Baretti School!
Sleep in peace, dear little boy!
To-day has been more cheerful than yesterday.
The thirteenth of March!
The eve of the distribution of prizes at the Theatre Vittorio Emanuele, the greatest and most beautiful festival of the whole year!
But this time the boys who are to go upon the stage and present the certificates of the prizes to the gentlemen who are to bestow them are not to be taken at haphazard.
The head-master came in this morning, at the close of school, and said:-
"Good news, boys!"
Then he called, "Coraci!"
the Calabrian.
The Calabrian rose.
"Would you like to be one of those to carry the certificates of the prizes to the authorities in the theatre to-morrow?"
The Calabrian answered that he should.
"That is well," said the head-master; "then there will also be a representative of Calabria there; and that will be a fine thing.
The municipal authorities are desirous that this year the ten or twelve lads who hand the prizes should be from all parts of Italy, and selected from all the public school buildings.
We have twenty buildings, with five annexes-seven thousand pupils.
Among such a multitude there has been no difficulty in finding one boy for each region of Italy.
Two representatives of the Islands were found in the Torquato Tasso schoolhouse, a Sardinian, and a Sicilian; the Boncompagni School furnished a little Florentine, the son of a wood-carver; there is a Roman, a native of Rome, in the Tommaseo building; several Venetians, Lombards, and natives of Romagna have been found; the Monviso School gives us a Neapolitan, the son of an officer; we furnish a Genoese and a Calabrian,-you, Coraci,-with the Piemontese: that will make twelve.
Does not this strike you as nice?
It will be your brothers from all quarters of Italy who will give you your prizes.
Look out!
the whole twelve will appear on the stage together.
Receive them with hearty applause.
They are only boys, but they represent the country just as though they were men.
A small tricolored flag is the symbol of Italy as much as a huge banner, is it not?
"Applaud them warmly, then.
Let it be seen that your little hearts are all aglow, that your souls of ten years grow enthusiastic in the presence of the sacred image of your fatherland."
Having spoken thus, he went away, and the master said, with a smile, "So, Coraci, you are to be the deputy from Calabria."
And then all clapped their hands and laughed; and when we got into the street, we surrounded Coraci, seized him by the legs, lifted him on high, and set out to carry him in triumph, shouting, "Hurrah for the Deputy of Calabria!"
by way of making a noise, of course; and not in jest, but quite the contrary, for the sake of making a celebration for him, and with a good will, for he is a boy who pleases every one; and he smiled.
And thus we bore him as far as the corner, where we ran into a gentleman with a black beard, who began to laugh.
The Calabrian said, "That is my father."
And then the boys placed his son in his arms and ran away in all directions.
March 14th.
Towards two o'clock the vast theatre was crowded,-pit, gallery, boxes, stage, all were thronged; thousands of faces,-boys, gentlemen, teachers, workingmen, women of the people, babies.
There was a moving of heads and hands, a flutter of feathers, ribbons, and curls, and loud and merry murmur which inspired cheerfulness.
The theatre was all decorated with festoons of white, red, and green cloth.
In the pit two little stairways had been erected: one on the right, which the winners of prizes were to ascend in order to reach the stage; the other, on the left, which they were to descend after receiving their prizes.
On the front of the platform there was a row of red chairs; and from the back of the one in the centre hung two laurel crowns.
At the back of the stage was a trophy of flags; on one side stood a small green table, and upon it lay all the certificates of premiums, tied with tricolored ribbons.
The band of music was stationed in the pit, under the stage; the schoolmasters and mistresses filled all one side of the first balcony, which had been reserved for them; the benches and passages of the pit were crammed with hundreds of boys, who were to sing, and who had written music in their hands.
At the back and all about, masters and mistresses could be seen going to and fro, arranging the prize scholars in lines; and it was full of parents who were giving a last touch to their hair and the last pull to their neckties.
No sooner had I entered my box with my family than I perceived in the opposite box the young mistress with the red feather, who was smiling and showing all the pretty dimples in her cheeks, and with her my brother's teacher and "the little nun," dressed wholly in black, and my kind mistress of the upper first; but she was so pale, poor thing!
and coughed so hard, that she could be heard all over the theatre.
In the pit I instantly espied Garrone's dear, big face and the little blond head of Nelli, who was clinging close to the other's shoulder.
A little further on I saw Garoffi, with his owl's-beak nose, who was making great efforts to collect the printed catalogues of the prize-winners; and he already had a large bundle of them which he could put to some use in his bartering-we shall find out what it is to-morrow.
Near the door was the wood-seller with his wife,-both dressed in festive attire,-together with their boy, who has a third prize in the second grade.
I was amazed at no longer beholding the catskin cap and the chocolate-colored tights: on this occasion he was dressed like a little gentleman.
In one balcony I caught a momentary glimpse of Votini, with a large lace collar; then he disappeared.
In a proscenium box, filled with people, was the artillery captain, the father of Robetti, the boy with the crutches who saved the child from the omnibus.
On the stroke of two the band struck up, and at the same moment the mayor, the prefect, the judge, the provveditore, and many other gentlemen, all dressed in black, mounted the stairs on the right, and seated themselves on the red chairs at the front of the platform.
The band ceased playing.
The director of singing in the schools advanced with a baton in his hand.
At a signal from him all the boys in the pit rose to their feet; at another sign they began to sing.
There were seven hundred singing a very beautiful song,-seven hundred boys' voices singing together; how beautiful!
All listened motionless: it was a slow, sweet, limpid song which seemed like a church chant.
When they ceased, every one applauded; then they all became very still.
The distribution of the prizes was about to begin.
My little master of the second grade, with his red head and his quick eyes, who was to read the names of the prize-winners, had already advanced to the front of the stage.
The entrance of the twelve boys who were to present the certificates was what they were waiting for.
The newspapers had already stated that there would be boys from all the provinces of Italy.
Every one knew it, and was watching for them and gazing curiously towards the spot where they were to enter, and the mayor and the other gentlemen gazed also, and the whole theatre was silent.
All at once the whole twelve arrived on the stage at a run, and remained standing there in line, with a smile.
The whole theatre, three thousand persons, sprang up simultaneously, breaking into applause which sounded like a clap of thunder.
The boys stood for a moment as though disconcerted.
"Behold Italy!"
said a voice on the stage.
All at once I recognized Coraci, the Calabrian, dressed in black as usual.
A gentleman belonging to the municipal government, who was with us and who knew them all, pointed them out to my mother.
"That little blond is the representative of Venice.
The Roman is that tall, curly-haired lad, yonder."
Two or three of them were dressed like gentlemen; the others were sons of workingmen, but all were neatly clad and clean.
The Florentine, who was the smallest, had a blue scarf round his body.
They all passed in front of the mayor, who kissed them, one after the other, on the brow, while a gentleman seated next to him smilingly told him the names of their cities: "Florence, Naples, Bologna, Palermo."
And as each passed by, the whole theatre clapped.
Then they all ran to the green table, to take the certificates.
The master began to read the list, mentioning the schoolhouses, the classes, the names; and the prize-winners began to mount the stage and to file past.
The foremost ones had hardly reached the stage, when behind the scenes there became audible a very, very faint music of violins, which did not cease during the whole time that they were filing past-a soft and always even air, like the murmur of many subdued voices, the voices of all the mothers, and all the masters and mistresses, giving counsel in concert, and beseeching and administering loving reproofs.
And meanwhile, the prize-winners passed one by one in front of the seated gentlemen, who handed them their certificates, and said a word or bestowed a caress on each.
The boys in the pit and the balconies applauded loudly every time that there passed a very small lad, or one who seemed, from his garments, to be poor; and also for those who had abundant curly hair, or who were clad in red or white.
Some of those who filed past belonged to the upper primary, and once arrived there, they became confused and did not know where to turn, and the whole theatre laughed.
One passed, three spans high, with a big knot of pink ribbon on his back, so that he could hardly walk, and he got entangled in the carpet and tumbled down; and the prefect set him on his feet again, and all laughed and clapped.
Another rolled headlong down the stairs, when descending again to the pit: cries arose, but he had not hurt himself.
Boys of all sorts passed,-boys with roguish faces, with frightened faces, with faces as red as cherries; comical little fellows, who laughed in every one's face: and no sooner had they got back into the pit, than they were seized upon by their fathers and mothers, who carried them away.
When our schoolhouse's turn came, how amused I was!
Many whom I knew passed.
Coretti filed by, dressed in new clothes from head to foot, with his fine, merry smile, which displayed all his white teeth; but who knows how many myriagrammes of wood he had already carried that morning!
The mayor, on presenting him with his certificate, inquired the meaning of a red mark on his forehead, and as he did so, laid one hand on his shoulder.
I looked in the pit for his father and mother, and saw them laughing, while they covered their mouths with one hand.
Then Derossi passed, all dressed in bright blue, with shining buttons, with all those golden curls, slender, easy, with his head held high, so handsome, so sympathetic, that I could have blown him a kiss; and all the gentlemen wanted to speak to him and to shake his hand.
Then the master cried, "Giulio Robetti!"
and we saw the captain's son come forward on his crutches.
Hundreds of boys knew the occurrence; a rumor ran round in an instant; a salvo of applause broke forth, and of shouts, which made the theatre tremble: men sprang to their feet, the ladies began to wave their handkerchiefs, and the poor boy halted in the middle of the stage, amazed and trembling.
The mayor drew him to him, gave him his prize and a kiss, and removing the two laurel crowns which were hanging from the back of the chair, he strung them on the cross-bars of his crutches.
Then he accompanied him to the proscenium box, where his father, the captain, was seated; and the latter lifted him bodily and set him down inside, amid an indescribable tumult of bravos and hurrahs.
Meanwhile, the soft and gentle music of the violins continued, and the boys continued to file by,-those from the Schoolhouse della Consolata, nearly all the sons of petty merchants; those from the Vanchiglia School, the sons of workingmen; those from the Boncompagni School, many of whom were the sons of peasants; those of the Rayneri, which was the last.
As soon as it was over, the seven hundred boys in the pit sang another very beautiful song; then the mayor spoke, and after him the judge, who terminated his discourse by saying to the boys:-
"But do not leave this place without sending a salute to those who toil so hard for you; who have consecrated to you all the strength of their intelligence and of their hearts; who live and die for you.
There they are; behold them!"
And he pointed to the balcony of teachers.
Then, from the balconies, from the pit, from the boxes, the boys rose, and extended their arms towards the masters and mistresses, with a shout, and the latter responded by waving their hands, their hats, and handkerchiefs, as they all stood up, in their emotion.
After this, the band played once more, and the audience sent a last noisy salute to the twelve lads of all the provinces of Italy, who presented themselves at the front of the stage, all drawn up in line, with their hands interlaced, beneath a shower of flowers.
Monday, 26th.
However, it is not out of envy, because he got the prize and I did not, that I quarrelled with Coretti this morning.
It was not out of envy.
But I was in the wrong.
The teacher had placed him beside me, and I was writing in my copy-book for calligraphy; he jogged my elbow and made me blot and soil the monthly story, Blood of Romagna, which I was to copy for the little mason, who is ill.
I got angry, and said a rude word to him.
He replied, with a smile, "I did not do it intentionally."
I should have believed him, because I know him; but it displeased me that he should smile, and I thought:-
"Oh!
now that he has had a prize, he has grown saucy!"
and a little while afterwards, to revenge myself, I gave him a jog which made him spoil his page.
Then, all crimson with wrath, "You did that on purpose," he said to me, and raised his hand: the teacher saw it; he drew it back.
But he added:-
"I shall wait for you outside!"
I felt ill at ease; my wrath had simmered away; I repented.
No; Coretti could not have done it intentionally.
He is good, I thought.
I recalled how I had seen him in his own home; how he had worked and helped his sick mother; and then how heartily he had been welcomed in my house; and how he had pleased my father.
What would I not have given not to have said that word to him; not to have insulted him thus!
And I thought of the advice that my father had given to me: "Have you done wrong?"-"Yes.
"-"Then beg his pardon."
But this I did not dare to do; I was ashamed to humiliate myself.
I looked at him out of the corner of my eye, and I saw his coat ripped on the shoulder,-perhaps because he had carried too much wood,-and I felt that I loved him; and I said to myself, "Courage!"
But the words, "excuse me," stuck in my throat.
He looked at me askance from time to time, and he seemed to me to be more grieved than angry.
But at such times I looked malevolently at him, to show him that I was not afraid.
He repeated, "We shall meet outside!"
And I said, "We shall meet outside!"
But I was thinking of what my father had once said to me, "If you are wronged, defend yourself, but do not fight."
And I said to myself, "I will defend myself, but I will not fight."
But I was discontented, and I no longer listened to the master.
At last the moment of dismissal arrived.
When I was alone in the street I perceived that he was following me.
I stopped and waited for him, ruler in hand.
He approached; I raised my ruler.
"No, Enrico," he said, with his kindly smile, waving the ruler aside with his hand; "let us be friends again, as before."
I stood still in amazement, and then I felt what seemed to be a hand dealing a push on my shoulders, and I found myself in his arms.
He kissed me, and said:-
"We'll have no more altercations between us, will we?"
"Never again!
never again!"
I replied.
And we parted content.
But when I returned home, and told my father all about it, thinking to give him pleasure, his face clouded over, and he said:-
"You should have been the first to offer your hand, since you were in the wrong."
Then he added, "You should not raise your ruler at a comrade who is better than you are-at the son of a soldier!"
and snatching the ruler from my hand, he broke it in two, and hurled it against the wall.
Friday, 24th.
Why, Enrico, after our father has already reproved you for having behaved badly to Coretti, were you so unkind to me?
You cannot imagine the pain that you caused me.
Do you not know that when you were a baby, I stood for hours and hours beside your cradle, instead of playing with my companions, and that when you were ill, I got out of bed every night to feel whether your forehead was burning?
Do you not know, you who grieve your sister, that if a tremendous misfortune should overtake us, I should be a mother to you and love you like my son?
Do you not know that when our father and mother are no longer here, I shall be your best friend, the only person with whom you can talk about our dead and your infancy, and that, should it be necessary, I shall work for you, Enrico, to earn your bread and to pay for your studies, and that I shall always love you when you are grown up, that I shall follow you in thought when you go far away, always because we grew up together and have the same blood?
O Enrico, be sure of this when you are a man, that if misfortune happens to you, if you are alone, be very sure that you will seek me, that you will come to me and say: "Silvia, sister, let me stay with you; let us talk of the days when we were happy-do you remember?
Let us talk of our mother, of our home, of those beautiful days that are so far away."
O Enrico, you will always find your sister with her arms wide open.
Yes, dear Enrico; and you must forgive me for the reproof that I am administering to you now.
I shall never recall any wrong of yours; and if you should give me other sorrows, what matters it?
You will always be my brother, the same brother; I shall never recall you otherwise than as having held you in my arms when a baby, of having loved our father and mother with you, of having watched you grow up, of having been for years your most faithful companion.
But do you write me a kind word in this same copy-book, and I will come for it and read it before the evening.
In the meanwhile, to show you that I am not angry with you, and perceiving that you are weary, I have copied for you the monthly story, Blood of Romagna, which you were to have copied for the little sick mason.
Look in the left drawer of your table; I have been writing all night, while you were asleep.
Write me a kind word, Enrico, I beseech you.
THY SISTER SILVIA.
I am not worthy to kiss your hands.-ENRICO.
(Monthly Story.)
That evening the house of Ferruccio was more silent than was its wont.
The father, who kept a little haberdasher's shop, had gone to Forli to make some purchases, and his wife had accompanied him, with Luigina, a baby, whom she was taking to a doctor, that he might operate on a diseased eye; and they were not to return until the following morning.
It was almost midnight.
The woman who came to do the work by day had gone away at nightfall.
In the house there was only the grandmother with the paralyzed legs, and Ferruccio, a lad of thirteen.
It was a small house of but one story, situated on the highway, at a gunshot's distance from a village not far from Forli, a town of Romagna; and there was near it only an uninhabited house, ruined two months previously by fire, on which the sign of an inn was still to be seen.
Behind the tiny house was a small garden surrounded by a hedge, upon which a rustic gate opened; the door of the shop, which also served as the house door, opened on the highway.
All around spread the solitary campagna, vast cultivated fields, planted with mulberry-trees.
It was nearly midnight; it was raining and blowing.
Ferruccio and his grandmother, who was still up, were in the dining-room, between which and the garden there was a small, closet-like room, encumbered with old furniture.
Ferruccio had only returned home at eleven o'clock, after an absence of many hours, and his grandmother had watched for him with eyes wide open, filled with anxiety, nailed to the large arm-chair, upon which she was accustomed to pass the entire day, and often the whole night as well, since a difficulty of breathing did not allow her to lie down in bed.
It was raining, and the wind beat the rain against the window-panes: the night was very dark.
Ferruccio had returned weary, muddy, with his jacket torn, and the livid mark of a stone on his forehead.
He had engaged in a stone fight with his comrades; they had come to blows, as usual; and in addition he had gambled, and lost all his soldi, and left his cap in a ditch.
Although the kitchen was illuminated only by a small oil lamp, placed on the corner of the table, near the arm-chair, his poor grandmother had instantly perceived the wretched condition of her grandson, and had partly divined, partly brought him to confess, his misdeeds.
She loved this boy with all her soul.
When she had learned all, she began to cry.
"Ah, no!"
she said, after a long silence, "you have no heart for your poor grandmother.
You have no feeling, to take advantage in this manner of the absence of your father and mother, to cause me sorrow.
You have left me alone the whole day long.
You had not the slightest compassion.
Take care, Ferruccio!
You are entering on an evil path which will lead you to a sad end.
I have seen others begin like you, and come to a bad end.
If you begin by running away from home, by getting into brawls with the other boys, by losing soldi, then, gradually, from stone fights you will come to knives, from gambling to other vices, and from other vices to-theft."
Ferruccio stood listening three paces away, leaning against a cupboard, with his chin on his breast and his brows knit, being still hot with wrath from the brawl.
A lock of fine chestnut hair fell across his forehead, and his blue eyes were motionless.
"From gambling to theft!"
repeated his grandmother, continuing to weep.
"Think of it, Ferruccio!
Think of that scourge of the country about here, of that Vito Mozzoni, who is now playing the vagabond in the town; who, at the age of twenty-four, has been twice in prison, and has made that poor woman, his mother, die of a broken heart-I knew her; and his father has fled to Switzerland in despair.
Think of that bad fellow, whose salute your father is ashamed to return: he is always roaming with miscreants worse than himself, and some day he will go to the galleys.
Well, I knew him as a boy, and he began as you are doing.
Reflect that you will reduce your father and mother to the same end as his."
Ferruccio held his peace.
He was not at all remorseful at heart; quite the reverse: his misdemeanors arose rather from superabundance of life and audacity than from an evil mind; and his father had managed him badly in precisely this particular, that, holding him capable, at bottom, of the finest sentiments, and also, when put to the proof, of a vigorous and generous action, he left the bridle loose upon his neck, and waited for him to acquire judgment for himself.
The lad was good rather than perverse, but stubborn; and it was hard for him, even when his heart was oppressed with repentance, to allow those good words which win pardon to escape his lips, "If I have done wrong, I will do so no more; I promise it; forgive me."
His soul was full of tenderness at times; but pride would not permit it to manifest itself.
"Ah, Ferruccio," continued his grandmother, perceiving that he was thus dumb, "not a word of penitence do you utter to me!
You see to what a condition I am reduced, so that I am as good as actually buried.
You ought not to have the heart to make me suffer so, to make the mother of your mother, who is so old and so near her last day, weep; the poor grandmother who has always loved you so, who rocked you all night long, night after night, when you were a baby a few months old, and who did not eat for amusing you,-you do not know that!
I always said, 'This boy will be my consolation!'
And now you are killing me!
I would willingly give the little life that remains to me if I could see you become a good boy, and an obedient one, as you were in those days when I used to lead you to the sanctuary-do you remember, Ferruccio?
You used to fill my pockets with pebbles and weeds, and I carried you home in my arms, fast asleep.
You used to love your poor grandma then.
And now I am a paralytic, and in need of your affection as of the air to breathe, since I have no one else in the world, poor, half-dead woman that I am: my God!"
Ferruccio was on the point of throwing himself on his grandmother, overcome with emotion, when he fancied that he heard a slight noise, a creaking in the small adjoining room, the one which opened on the garden.
But he could not make out whether it was the window-shutters rattling in the wind, or something else.
He bent his head and listened.
The rain beat down noisily.
The sound was repeated.
His grandmother heard it also.
"What is it?"
asked the grandmother, in perturbation, after a momentary pause.
"The rain," murmured the boy.
"Then, Ferruccio," said the old woman, drying her eyes, "you promise me that you will be good, that you will not make your poor grandmother weep again-"
Another faint sound interrupted her.
"But it seems to me that it is not the rain!"
she exclaimed, turning pale.
"Go and see!"
But she instantly added, "No; remain here!"
and seized Ferruccio by the hand.
Both remained as they were, and held their breath.
All they heard was the sound of the water.
Then both were seized with a shivering fit.
It seemed to both that they heard footsteps in the next room.
"Who's there?"
demanded the lad, recovering his breath with an effort.
No one replied.
"Who is it?"
asked Ferruccio again, chilled with terror.
But hardly had he pronounced these words when both uttered a shriek of terror.
Two men sprang into the room.
One of them grasped the boy and placed one hand over his mouth; the other clutched the old woman by the throat.
The first said:-
"Silence, unless you want to die!"
The second:-
"Be quiet!"
and raised aloft a knife.
Both had dark cloths over their faces, with two holes for the eyes.
For a moment nothing was audible but the gasping breath of all four, the patter of the rain; the old woman emitted frequent rattles from her throat, and her eyes were starting from her head.
The man who held the boy said in his ear, "Where does your father keep his money?"
The lad replied in a thread of a voice, with chattering teeth, "Yonder-in the cupboard."
"Come with me," said the man.
And he dragged him into the closet room, holding him securely by the throat.
There was a dark lantern standing on the floor.
"Where is the cupboard?"
he demanded.
The suffocating boy pointed to the cupboard.
Then, in order to make sure of the boy, the man flung him on his knees in front of the cupboard, and, pressing his neck closely between his own legs, in such a way that he could throttle him if he shouted, and holding his knife in his teeth and his lantern in one hand, with the other he pulled from his pocket a pointed iron, drove it into the lock, fumbled about, broke it, threw the doors wide open, tumbled everything over in a perfect fury of haste, filled his pockets, shut the cupboard again, opened it again, made another search; then he seized the boy by the windpipe again, and pushed him to where the other man was still grasping the old woman, who was convulsed, with her head thrown back and her mouth open.
The latter asked in a low voice, "Did you find it?"
His companion replied, "I found it."
And he added, "See to the door."
The one that was holding the old woman ran to the door of the garden to see if there were any one there, and called in from the little room, in a voice that resembled a hiss, "Come!"
The one who remained behind, and who was still holding Ferruccio fast, showed his knife to the boy and the old woman, who had opened her eyes again, and said, "Not a sound, or I'll come back and cut your throat."
And he glared at the two for a moment.
At this juncture, a song sung by many voices became audible far off on the highway.
The robber turned his head hastily toward the door, and the violence of the movement caused the cloth to fall from his face.
The old woman gave vent to a shriek; "Mozzoni!"
"Accursed woman," roared the robber, on finding himself recognized, "you shall die!"
And he hurled himself, with his knife raised, against the old woman, who swooned on the spot.
The assassin dealt the blow.
But Ferruccio, with an exceedingly rapid movement, and uttering a cry of desperation, had rushed to his grandmother, and covered her body with his own.
The assassin fled, stumbling against the table and overturning the light, which was extinguished.
The boy slipped slowly from above his grandmother, fell on his knees, and remained in that attitude, with his arms around her body and his head upon her breast.
Several moments passed; it was very dark; the song of the peasants gradually died away in the campagna.
The old woman recovered her senses.
"Ferruccio!"
she cried, in a voice that was barely intelligible, with chattering teeth.
"Grandmamma!"
replied the lad.
The old woman made an effort to speak; but terror had paralyzed her tongue.
She remained silent for a while, trembling violently.
Then she succeeded in asking:-
"They are not here now?"
"No."
"They did not kill me," murmured the old woman in a stifled voice.
"No; you are safe," said Ferruccio, in a weak voice.
"You are safe, dear grandmother.
They carried off the money.
But daddy had taken nearly all of it with him."
His grandmother drew a deep breath.
"Grandmother," said Ferruccio, still kneeling, and pressing her close to him, "dear grandmother, you love me, don't you?"
"O Ferruccio!
my poor little son!"
she replied, placing her hands on his head; "what a fright you must have had!-O Lord God of mercy!-Light the lamp.
No; let us still remain in the dark!
I am still afraid."
"Grandmother," resumed the boy, "I have always caused you grief."
"No, Ferruccio, you must not say such things; I shall never think of that again; I have forgotten everything, I love you so dearly!"
"I have always caused you grief," pursued Ferruccio, with difficulty, and his voice quivered; "but I have always loved you.
Do you forgive me?-Forgive me, grandmother."
"Yes, my son, I forgive you with all my heart.
Think, how could I help forgiving you!
Rise from your knees, my child.
I will never scold you again.
You are so good, so good!
Let us light the lamp.
Let us take courage a little.
Rise, Ferruccio."
"Thanks, grandmother," said the boy, and his voice was still weaker.
"Now-I am content.
You will remember me, grandmother-will you not?
You will always remember me-your Ferruccio?"
"My Ferruccio!"
exclaimed his grandmother, amazed and alarmed, as she laid her hands on his shoulders and bent her head, as though to look him in his face.
"Remember me," murmured the boy once more, in a voice that seemed like a breath.
"Give a kiss to my mother-to my father-to Luigina.-Good by, grandmother."
"In the name of Heaven, what is the matter with you?"
shrieked the old woman, feeling the boy's head anxiously, as it lay upon her knees; and then with all the power of voice of which her throat was capable, and in desperation: "Ferruccio!
Ferruccio!
Ferruccio!
My child!
My love!
Angels of Paradise, come to my aid!"
But Ferruccio made no reply.
The little hero, the saviour of the mother of his mother, stabbed by a blow from a knife in the back, had rendered up his beautiful and daring soul to God.
Tuesday, 18th.
The poor little mason is seriously ill; the master told us to go and see him; and Garrone, Derossi, and I agreed to go together.
Stardi would have come also, but as the teacher had assigned us the description of The Monument to Cavour, he told us that he must go and see the monument, in order that his description might be more exact.
So, by way of experiment, we invited that puffed-up fellow, Nobis, who replied "No," and nothing more.
Votini also excused himself, perhaps because he was afraid of soiling his clothes with plaster.
We went there when we came out of school at four o'clock.
It was raining in torrents.
On the street Garrone halted, and said, with his mouth full of bread:-
"What shall I buy?"
and he rattled a couple of soldi in his pocket.
We each contributed two soldi, and purchased three huge oranges.
We ascended to the garret.
At the door Derossi removed his medal and put it in his pocket.
I asked him why.
"I don't know," he answered; "in order not to have the air: it strikes me as more delicate to go in without my medal."
We knocked; the father, that big man who looks like a giant, opened to us; his face was distorted so that he appeared terrified.
"Who are you?"
he demanded.
Garrone replied:-
"We are Antonio's schoolmates, and we have brought him three oranges."
"Ah, poor Tonino!"
exclaimed the mason, shaking his head, "I fear that he will never eat your oranges!"
and he wiped his eyes with the back of his hand.
He made us come in.
We entered an attic room, where we saw "the little mason" asleep in a little iron bed; his mother hung dejectedly over the bed, with her face in her hands, and she hardly turned to look at us; on one side hung brushes, a trowel, and a plaster-sieve; over the feet of the sick boy was spread the mason's jacket, white with lime.
The poor boy was emaciated; very, very white; his nose was pointed, and his breath was short.
O dear Tonino, my little comrade!
you who were so kind and merry, how it pains me!
what would I not give to see you make the hare's face once more, poor little mason!
Garrone laid an orange on his pillow, close to his face; the odor waked him; he grasped it instantly; then let go of it, and gazed intently at Garrone.
"It is I," said the latter; "Garrone: do you know me?"
He smiled almost imperceptibly, lifted his stubby hand with difficulty from the bed and held it out to Garrone, who took it between his, and laid it against his cheek, saying:-
"Courage, courage, little mason; you are going to get well soon and come back to school, and the master will put you next to me; will that please you?"
But the little mason made no reply.
His mother burst into sobs: "Oh, my poor Tonino!
My poor Tonino!
He is so brave and good, and God is going to take him from us!"
"Silence!"
cried the mason; "silence, for the love of God, or I shall lose my reason!"
Then he said to us, with anxiety: "Go, go, boys, thanks; go!
what do you want to do here?
Thanks; go home!"
The boy had closed his eyes again, and appeared to be dead.
"Do you need any assistance?"
asked Garrone.
"No, my good boy, thanks," the mason answered.
And so saying, he pushed us out on the landing, and shut the door.
But we were not half-way down the stairs, when we heard him calling, "Garrone!
Garrone!"
We all three mounted the stairs once more in haste.
"Garrone!"
shouted the mason, with a changed countenance, "he has called you by name; it is two days since he spoke; he has called you twice; he wants you; come quickly!
Ah, holy God, if this is only a good sign!"
"Farewell for the present," said Garrone to us; "I shall remain," and he ran in with the father.
Derossi's eyes were full of tears.
I said to him:-
"Are you crying for the little mason?
He has spoken; he will recover."
"I believe it," replied Derossi; "but I was not thinking of him.
I was thinking how good Garrone is, and what a beautiful soul he has."
Wednesday, 29th.
You are to make a description of the monument to Count Cavour.
You can do it.
But who was Count Cavour?
You cannot understand at present.
For the present this is all you know: he was for many years the prime minister of Piemont.
It was he who sent the Piemontese army to the Crimea to raise once more, with the victory of the Cernaia, our military glory, which had fallen with the defeat at Novara; it was he who made one hundred and fifty thousand Frenchmen descend from the Alps to chase the Austrians from Lombardy; it was he who governed Italy in the most solemn period of our revolution; who gave, during those years, the most potent impulse to the holy enterprise of the unification of our country,-he with his luminous mind, with his invincible perseverance, with his more than human industry.
Many generals have passed terrible hours on the field of battle; but he passed more terrible ones in his cabinet, when his enormous work might suffer destruction at any moment, like a fragile edifice at the tremor of an earthquake.
Hours, nights of struggle and anguish did he pass, sufficient to make him issue from it with reason distorted and death in his heart.
And it was this gigantic and stormy work which shortened his life by twenty years.
Nevertheless, devoured by the fever which was to cast him into his grave, he yet contended desperately with the malady in order to accomplish something for his country.
"It is strange," he said sadly on his death-bed, "I no longer know how to read; I can no longer read."
While they were bleeding him, and the fever was increasing, he was thinking of his country, and he said imperiously: "Cure me; my mind is clouding over; I have need of all my faculties to manage important affairs."
When he was already reduced to extremities, and the whole city was in a tumult, and the king stood at his bedside, he said anxiously, "I have many things to say to you, Sire, many things to show you; but I am ill; I cannot, I cannot;" and he was in despair.
And his feverish thoughts hovered ever round the State, round the new Italian provinces which had been united with us, round the many things which still remained to be done.
When delirium seized him, "Educate the children!"
he exclaimed, between his gasps for breath,-"educate the children and the young people-govern with liberty!"
His delirium increased; death hovered over him, and with burning words he invoked General Garibaldi, with whom he had had disagreements, and Venice and Rome, which were not yet free: he had vast visions of the future of Italy and of Europe; he dreamed of a foreign invasion; he inquired where the corps of the army were, and the generals; he still trembled for us, for his people.
His great sorrow was not, you understand, that he felt that his life was going, but to see himself fleeing his country, which still had need of him, and for which he had, in a few years, worn out the measureless forces of his miraculous organism.
He died with the battle-cry in his throat, and his death was as great as his life.
Now reflect a little, Enrico, what sort of a thing is our labor, which nevertheless so weighs us down; what are our griefs, our death itself, in the face of the toils, the terrible anxieties, the tremendous agonies of these men upon whose hearts rests a world!
Think of this, my son, when you pass before that marble image, and say to it, "Glory!"
in your heart.
THY FATHER.
Saturday, 1st.
THE first of April!
Only three months more!
This has been one of the most beautiful mornings of the year.
I was happy in school because Coretti told me to come day after to-morrow to see the king make his entrance with his father, who knows him, and because my mother had promised to take me the same day to visit the Infant Asylum in the Corso Valdocco.
I was pleased, too, because the little mason is better, and because the teacher said to my father yesterday evening as he was passing, "He is doing well; he is doing well."
And then it was a beautiful spring morning.
From the school windows we could see the blue sky, the trees of the garden all covered with buds, and the wide-open windows of the houses, with their boxes and vases already growing green.
The master did not laugh, because he never laughs; but he was in a good humor, so that that perpendicular wrinkle hardly ever appeared on his brow; and he explained a problem on the blackboard, and jested.
And it was plain that he felt a pleasure in breathing the air of the gardens which entered through the open window, redolent with the fresh odor of earth and leaves, which suggested thoughts of country rambles.
While he was explaining, we could hear in a neighboring street a blacksmith hammering on his anvil, and in the house opposite, a woman singing to lull her baby to sleep; far away, in the Cernaia barracks, the trumpets were sounding.
Every one appeared pleased, even Stardi.
At a certain moment the blacksmith began to hammer more vigorously, the woman to sing more loudly.
The master paused and lent an ear.
Then he said, slowly, as he gazed out of the window:-
"The smiling sky, a singing mother, an honest man at work, boys at study,-these are beautiful things."
When we emerged from the school, we saw that every one else was cheerful also.
All walked in a line, stamping loudly with their feet, and humming, as though on the eve of a four days' vacation; the schoolmistresses were playful; the one with the red feather tripped along behind the children like a schoolgirl; the parents of the boys were chatting together and smiling, and Crossi's mother, the vegetable-vender, had so many bunches of violets in her basket, that they filled the whole large hall with perfume.
I have never felt such happiness as this morning on catching sight of my mother, who was waiting for me in the street.
And I said to her as I ran to meet her:-
"Oh, I am happy!
what is it that makes me so happy this morning?"
And my mother answered me with a smile that it was the beautiful season and a good conscience.
Monday, 3d.
At ten o'clock precisely my father saw from the window Coretti, the wood-seller, and his son waiting for me in the square, and said to me:-
"There they are, Enrico; go and see your king."
I went like a flash.
Both father and son were even more alert than usual, and they never seemed to me to resemble each other so strongly as this morning.
The father wore on his jacket the medal for valor between two commemorative medals, and his mustaches were curled and as pointed as two pins.
We at once set out for the railway station, where the king was to arrive at half-past ten.
Coretti, the father, smoked his pipe and rubbed his hands.
"Do you know," said he, "I have not seen him since the war of 'sixty-six?
A trifle of fifteen years and six months.
First, three years in France, and then at Mondov, and here, where I might have seen him, I have never had the good luck of being in the city when he came.
Such a combination of circumstances!"
He called the King "Umberto," like a comrade.
Umberto commanded the 16th division; Umberto was twenty-two years and so many days old; Umberto mounted a horse thus and so.
"Fifteen years!"
he said vehemently, accelerating his pace.
"I really have a great desire to see him again.
I left him a prince; I see him once more, a king.
And I, too, have changed.
From a soldier I have become a hawker of wood."
And he laughed.
His son asked him, "If he were to see you, would he remember you?"
He began to laugh.
"You are crazy!"
he answered.
"That's quite another thing.
He, Umberto, was one single man; we were as numerous as flies.
And then, he never looked at us one by one."
We turned into the Corso Vittorio Emanuele; there were many people on their way to the station.
A company of Alpine soldiers passed with their trumpets.
Two armed policemen passed by on horseback at a gallop.
The day was serene and brilliant.
"Yes!"
exclaimed the elder Coretti, growing animated, "it is a real pleasure to me to see him once more, the general of my division.
Ah, how quickly I have grown old!
It seems as though it were only the other day that I had my knapsack on my shoulders and my gun in my hands, at that affair of the 24th of June, when we were on the point of coming to blows.
Umberto was going to and fro with his officers, while the cannon were thundering in the distance; and every one was gazing at him and saying, 'May there not be a bullet for him also!'
I was a thousand miles from thinking that I should soon find myself so near him, in front of the lances of the Austrian uhlans; actually, only four paces from each other, boys.
That was a fine day; the sky was like a mirror; but so hot!
Let us see if we can get in."
We had arrived at the station; there was a great crowd,-carriages, policemen, carabineers, societies with banners.
A regimental band was playing.
The elder Coretti attempted to enter the portico, but he was stopped.
Then it occurred to him to force his way into the front row of the crowd which formed an opening at the entrance; and making way with his elbow, he succeeded in thrusting us forward also.
But the undulating throng flung us hither and thither a little.
The wood-seller got his eye upon the first pillar of the portico, where the police did not allow any one to stand; "Come with me," he said suddenly, dragging us by the hand; and he crossed the empty space in two bounds, and went and planted himself there, with his back against the wall.
A police brigadier instantly hurried up and said to him, "You can't stand here."
"I belong to the fourth battalion of forty-nine," replied Coretti, touching his medal.
The brigadier glanced at it, and said, "Remain."
"Didn't I say so!"
exclaimed Coretti triumphantly; "it's a magic word, that fourth of the forty-ninth!
Haven't I the right to see my general with some little comfort,-I, who was in that squadron?
I saw him close at hand then; it seems right that I should see him close at hand now.
And I say general!
He was my battalion commander for a good half-hour; for at such moments he commanded the battalion himself, while it was in the heart of things, and not Major Ubrich, by Heavens!"
In the meantime, in the reception-room and outside, a great mixture of gentlemen and officers was visible, and in front of the door, the carriages, with the lackeys dressed in red, were drawn up in a line.
Coretti asked his father whether Prince Umberto had his sword in his hand when he was with the regiment.
"He would certainly have had his sword in his hand," the latter replied, "to ward off a blow from a lance, which might strike him as well as another.
Ah!
those unchained demons!
They came down on us like the wrath of God; they descended on us.
They swept between the groups, the squadrons, the cannon, as though tossed by a hurricane, crushing down everything.
There was a whirl of light cavalry of Alessandria, of lancers of Foggia, of infantry, of sharpshooters, a pandemonium in which nothing could any longer be understood.
I heard the shout, 'Your Highness!
your Highness!'
I saw the lowered lances approaching; we discharged our guns; a cloud of smoke hid everything.
Then the smoke cleared away.
The ground was covered with horses and uhlans, wounded and dead.
I turned round, and beheld in our midst Umberto, on horseback, gazing tranquilly about, with the air of demanding, 'Have any of my lads received a scratch?'
And we shouted to him, 'Hurrah!'
right in his face, like madmen.
Heavens, what a moment that was!
Here's the train coming!"
The band struck up; the officers hastened forward; the crowd elevated themselves on tiptoe.
"Eh, he won't come out in a hurry," said a policeman; "they are presenting him with an address now."
The elder Coretti was beside himself with impatience.
"Ah!
when I think of it," he said, "I always see him there.
Of course, there is cholera and there are earthquakes; and in them, too, he bears himself bravely; but I always have him before my mind as I saw him then, among us, with that tranquil face.
I am sure that he too recalls the fourth of the forty-ninth, even now that he is King; and that it would give him pleasure to have for once, at a table together, all those whom he saw about him at such moments.
Now, he has generals, and great gentlemen, and courtiers; then, there was no one but us poor soldiers.
If we could only exchange a few words alone!
Our general of twenty-two; our prince, who was intrusted to our bayonets!
I have not seen him for fifteen years.
Our Umberto!
that's what he is!
Ah!
that music stirs my blood, on my word of honor."
An outburst of shouts interrupted him; thousands of hats rose in the air; four gentlemen dressed in black got into the first carriage.
"'Tis he!"
cried Coretti, and stood as though enchanted.
Then he said softly, "Madonna mia, how gray he has grown!"
We all three uncovered our heads; the carriage advanced slowly through the crowd, who shouted and waved their hats.
I looked at the elder Coretti.
He seemed to me another man; he seemed to have become taller, graver, rather pale, and fastened bolt upright against the pillar.
The carriage arrived in front of us, a pace distant from the pillar.
"Hurrah!"
shouted many voices.
"Hurrah!"
shouted Coretti, after the others.
The King glanced at his face, and his eye dwelt for a moment on his three medals.
Then Coretti lost his head, and roared, "The fourth battalion of the forty-ninth!"
The King, who had turned away, turned towards us again, and looking Coretti straight in the eye, reached his hand out of the carriage.
Coretti gave one leap forwards and clasped it.
The carriage passed on; the crowd broke in and separated us; we lost sight of the elder Coretti.
But it was only for a moment.
We found him again directly, panting, with wet eyes, calling for his son by name, and holding his hand on high.
His son flew towards him, and he said, "Here, little one, while my hand is still warm!"
and he passed his hand over the boy's face, saying, "This is a caress from the King."
And there he stood, as though in a dream, with his eyes fixed on the distant carriage, smiling, with his pipe in his hand, in the centre of a group of curious people, who were staring at him.
"He's one of the fourth battalion of the forty-ninth!"
they said.
"He is a soldier that knows the King."
"And the King recognized him."
"And he offered him his hand."
"He gave the King a petition," said one, more loudly.
"No," replied Coretti, whirling round abruptly; "I did not give him any petition.
There is something else that I would give him, if he were to ask it of me."
They all stared at him.
And he said simply, "My blood."
Tuesday, 4th.
After breakfast yesterday my mother took me, as she had promised, to the Infant Asylum in the Corso Valdocco, in order to recommend to the directress a little sister of Precossi.
I had never seen an asylum.
How much amused I was!
There were two hundred of them, boy-babies and girl-babies, and so small that the children in our lower primary schools are men in comparison.
We arrived just as they were entering the refectory in two files, where there were two very long tables, with a great many round holes, and in each hole a black bowl filled with rice and beans, and a tin spoon beside it.
On entering, some grew confused and remained on the floor until the mistresses ran and picked them up.
Many halted in front of a bowl, thinking it was their proper place, and had already swallowed a spoonful, when a mistress arrived and said, "Go on!"
and then they advanced three or four paces and got down another spoonful, and then advanced again, until they reached their own places, after having fraudulently disposed of half a portion.
At last, by dint of pushing and crying, "Make haste!
make haste!"
they were all got into order, and the prayer was begun.
But all those on the inner line, who had to turn their backs on the bowls for the prayer, twisted their heads round so that they could keep an eye on them, lest some one might meddle; and then they said their prayer thus, with hands clasped and their eyes on the ceiling, but with their hearts on their food.
Then they set to eating.
Ah, what a charming sight it was!
One ate with two spoons, another with his hands; many picked up the beans one by one, and thrust them into their pockets; others wrapped them tightly in their little aprons, and pounded them to reduce them to a paste.
There were even some who did not eat, because they were watching the flies flying, and others coughed and sprinkled a shower of rice all around them.
It resembled a poultry-yard.
But it was charming.
The two rows of babies formed a pretty sight, with their hair all tied on the tops of their heads with red, green, and blue ribbons.
One teacher asked a row of eight children, "Where does rice grow?"
The whole eight opened their mouths wide, filled as they were with the pottage, and replied in concert, in a sing-song, "It grows in the water."
Then the teacher gave the order, "Hands up!"
and it was pretty to see all those little arms fly up, which a few months ago were all in swaddling-clothes, and all those little hands flourishing, which looked like so many white and pink butterflies.
Then they all went to recreation; but first they all took their little baskets, which were hanging on the wall with their lunches in them.
They went out into the garden and scattered, drawing forth their provisions as they did so,-bread, stewed plums, a tiny bit of cheese, a hard-boiled egg, little apples, a handful of boiled vetches, or a wing of chicken.
In an instant the whole garden was strewn with crumbs, as though they had been scattered from their feed by a flock of birds.
They ate in all the queerest ways,-like rabbits, like rats, like cats, nibbling, licking, sucking.
There was one child who held a bit of rye bread hugged closely to his breast, and was rubbing it with a medlar, as though he were polishing a sword.
Some of the little ones crushed in their fists small cheeses, which trickled between their fingers like milk, and ran down inside their sleeves, and they were utterly unconscious of it.
They ran and chased each other with apples and rolls in their teeth, like dogs.
I saw three of them excavating a hard-boiled egg with a straw, thinking to discover treasures, and they spilled half of it on the ground, and then picked the crumbs up again one by one with great patience, as though they had been pearls.
And those who had anything extraordinary were surrounded by eight or ten, who stood staring at the baskets with bent heads, as though they were looking at the moon in a well.
There were twenty congregated round a mite of a fellow who had a paper horn of sugar, and they were going through all sorts of ceremonies with him for the privilege of dipping their bread in it, and he accorded it to some, while to others, after many prayers, he only granted his finger to suck.
In the meantime, my mother had come into the garden and was caressing now one and now another.
Many hung about her, and even on her back, begging for a kiss, with faces upturned as though to a third story, and with mouths that opened and shut as though asking for the breast.
One offered her the quarter of an orange which had been bitten, another a small crust of bread; one little girl gave her a leaf; another showed her, with all seriousness, the tip of her forefinger, a minute examination of which revealed a microscopic swelling, which had been caused by touching the flame of a candle on the preceding day.
They placed before her eyes, as great marvels, very tiny insects, which I cannot understand their being able to see and catch, the halfs of corks, shirt-buttons, and flowerets pulled from the vases.
One child, with a bandaged head, who was determined to be heard at any cost, stammered out to her some story about a head-over-heels tumble, not one word of which was intelligible; another insisted that my mother should bend down, and then whispered in her ear, "My father makes brushes."
And in the meantime a thousand accidents were happening here and there which caused the teachers to hasten up.
Children wept because they could not untie a knot in their handkerchiefs; others disputed, with scratches and shrieks, the halves of an apple; one child, who had fallen face downward over a little bench which had been overturned, wept amid the ruins, and could not rise.
Before her departure my mother took three or four of them in her arms, and they ran up from all quarters to be taken also, their faces smeared with yolk of egg and orange juice; and one caught her hands; another her finger, to look at her ring; another tugged at her watch chain; another tried to seize her by the hair.
"Take care," the teacher said to her; "they will tear your clothes all to pieces."
But my mother cared nothing for her dress, and she continued to kiss them, and they pressed closer and closer to her: those who were nearest, with their arms extended as though they were desirous of climbing; the more distant endeavoring to make their way through the crowd, and all screaming:-
"Good by!
good by!
good by!"
At last she succeeded in escaping from the garden.
And they all ran and thrust their faces through the railings to see her pass, and to thrust their arms through to greet her, offering her once more bits of bread, bites of apple, cheese-rinds, and all screaming in concert:-
"Good by!
good by!
good by!
Come back to-morrow!
Come again!"
As my mother made her escape, she passed her hand once more over those hundreds of tiny outstretched hands as over a garland of living roses, and finally arrived safely in the street, covered with crumbs and spots, rumpled and dishevelled, with one hand full of flowers and her eyes swelling with tears, and happy as though she had come from a festival.
And inside there was still audible a sound like the twittering of birds, saying:-
"Good by!
good by!
Come again, madama !"
Tuesday, 5th.
As the weather continues extremely fine, they have made us pass from chamber gymnastics to gymnastics with apparatus in the garden.
Garrone was in the head-master's office yesterday when Nelli's mother, that blond woman dressed in black, came in to get her son excused from the new exercises.
Every word cost her an effort; and as she spoke, she held one hand on her son's head.
"He is not able to do it," she said to the head-master.
But Nelli showed much grief at this exclusion from the apparatus, at having this added humiliation imposed upon him.
"You will see, mamma," he said, "that I shall do like the rest."
His mother gazed at him in silence, with an air of pity and affection.
Then she remarked, in a hesitating way, "I fear lest his companions-"
What she meant to say was, "lest they should make sport of him."
But Nelli replied:-
"They will not do anything to me-and then, there is Garrone.
It is sufficient for him to be present, to prevent their laughing."
And then he was allowed to come.
The teacher with the wound on his neck, who was with Garibaldi, led us at once to the vertical bars, which are very high, and we had to climb to the very top, and stand upright on the transverse plank.
Derossi and Coretti went up like monkeys; even little Precossi mounted briskly, in spite of the fact that he was embarrassed with that jacket which extends to his knees; and in order to make him laugh while he was climbing, all the boys repeated to him his constant expression, "Excuse me!
excuse me!"
Stardi puffed, turned as red as a turkey-cock, and set his teeth until he looked like a mad dog; but he would have reached the top at the expense of bursting, and he actually did get there; and so did Nobis, who, when he reached the summit, assumed the attitude of an emperor; but Votini slipped back twice, notwithstanding his fine new suit with azure stripes, which had been made expressly for gymnastics.
In order to climb the more easily, all the boys had daubed their hands with resin, which they call colophony, and as a matter of course it is that trader of a Garoffi who provides every one with it, in a powdered form, selling it at a soldo the paper hornful, and turning a pretty penny.
Then it was Garrone's turn, and up he went, chewing away at his bread as though it were nothing out of the common; and I believe that he would have been capable of carrying one of us up on his shoulders, for he is as muscular and strong as a young bull.
After Garrone came Nelli.
No sooner did the boys see him grasp the bars with those long, thin hands of his, than many of them began to laugh and to sing; but Garrone crossed his big arms on his breast, and darted round a glance which was so expressive, which so clearly said that he did not mind dealing out half a dozen punches, even in the master's presence, that they all ceased laughing on the instant.
Nelli began to climb.
He tried hard, poor little fellow; his face grew purple, he breathed with difficulty, and the perspiration poured from his brow.
The master said, "Come down!"
But he would not.
He strove and persisted.
I expected every moment to see him fall headlong, half dead.
Poor Nelli!
I thought, what if I had been like him, and my mother had seen me!
How she would have suffered, poor mother!
And as I thought of that I felt so tenderly towards Nelli that I could have given, I know not what, to be able, for the sake of having him climb those bars, to give him a push from below without being seen.
Meanwhile Garrone, Derossi, and Coretti were saying: "Up with you, Nelli, up with you!"
"Try-one effort more-courage!"
And Nelli made one more violent effort, uttering a groan as he did so, and found himself within two spans of the plank.
"Bravo!"
shouted the others.
"Courage-one dash more!"
and behold Nelli clinging to the plank.
All clapped their hands.
"Bravo!"
said the master.
"But that will do now.
Come down."
But Nelli wished to ascend to the top like the rest, and after a little exertion he succeeded in getting his elbows on the plank, then his knees, then his feet; at last he stood upright, panting and smiling, and gazed at us.
We began to clap again, and then he looked into the street.
I turned in that direction, and through the plants which cover the iron railing of the garden I caught sight of his mother, passing along the sidewalk without daring to look.
Nelli descended, and we all made much of him.
He was excited and rosy, his eyes sparkled, and he no longer seemed like the same boy.
Then, at the close of school, when his mother came to meet him, and inquired with some anxiety, as she embraced him, "Well, my poor son, how did it go?
how did it go?"
all his comrades replied, in concert, "He did well-he climbed like the rest of us-he's strong, you know-he's active-he does exactly like the others."
And then the joy of that woman was a sight to see.
She tried to thank us, and could not; she shook hands with three or four, bestowed a caress on Garrone, and carried off her son; and we watched them for a while, walking in haste, and talking and gesticulating, both perfectly happy, as though no one were looking at them.
Tuesday, 11th.
What a beautiful excursion I took yesterday with my father!
This is the way it came about.
Day before yesterday, at dinner, as my father was reading the newspaper, he suddenly uttered an exclamation of astonishment.
Then he said:-
"And I thought him dead twenty years ago!
Do you know that my old first elementary teacher, Vincenzo Crosetti, is eighty-four years old?
I see here that the minister has conferred on him the medal of merit for sixty years of teaching.
Six-ty ye-ars, you understand!
And it is only two years since he stopped teaching school.
Poor Crosetti!
He lives an hour's journey from here by rail, at Condove, in the country of our old gardener's wife, of the town of Chieri."
And he added, "Enrico, we will go and see him."
And the whole evening he talked of nothing but him.
The name of his primary teacher recalled to his mind a thousand things which had happened when he was a boy, his early companions, his dead mother.
"Crosetti!"
he exclaimed.
"He was forty when I was with him.
I seem to see him now.
He was a small man, somewhat bent even then, with bright eyes, and always cleanly shaved.
Severe, but in a good way; for he loved us like a father, and forgave us more than one offence.
He had risen from the condition of a peasant by dint of study and privations.
He was a fine man.
My mother was attached to him, and my father treated him like a friend.
How comes it that he has gone to end his days at Condove, near Turin?
He certainly will not recognize me.
Never mind; I shall recognize him.
Forty-four years have elapsed,-forty-four years, Enrico!
and we will go to see him to-morrow."
And yesterday morning, at nine o'clock, we were at the Susa railway station.
I should have liked to have Garrone come too; but he could not, because his mother is ill.
It was a beautiful spring day.
The train ran through green fields and hedgerows in blossom, and the air we breathed was perfumed.
My father was delighted, and every little while he would put his arm round my neck and talk to me like a friend, as he gazed out over the country.
"Poor Crosetti!"
he said; "he was the first man, after my father, to love me and do me good.
I have never forgotten certain of his good counsels, and also certain sharp reprimands which caused me to return home with a lump in my throat.
His hands were large and stubby.
I can see him now, as he used to enter the schoolroom, place his cane in a corner and hang his coat on the peg, always with the same gesture.
And every day he was in the same humor,-always conscientious, full of good will, and attentive, as though each day he were teaching school for the first time.
I remember him as well as though I heard him now when he called to me: 'Bottini!
eh, Bottini!
The fore and middle fingers on that pen!'
He must have changed greatly in these four and forty years."
As soon as we reached Condove, we went in search of our old gardener's wife of Chieri, who keeps a stall in an alley.
We found her with her boys: she made much of us and gave us news of her husband, who is soon to return from Greece, where he has been working these three years; and of her eldest daughter, who is in the Deaf-mute Institute in Turin.
Then she pointed out to us the street which led to the teacher's house,-for every one knows him.
We left the town, and turned into a steep lane flanked by blossoming hedges.
My father no longer talked, but appeared entirely absorbed in his reminiscences; and every now and then he smiled, and then shook his head.
Suddenly he halted and said: "Here he is.
I will wager that this is he."
Down the lane towards us a little old man with a white beard and a large hat was descending, leaning on a cane.
He dragged his feet along, and his hands trembled.
"It is he!"
repeated my father, hastening his steps.
When we were close to him, we stopped.
The old man stopped also and looked at my father.
His face was still fresh colored, and his eyes were clear and vivacious.
"Are you," asked my father, raising his hat, "Vincenzo Crosetti, the schoolmaster?"
The old man raised his hat also, and replied: "I am," in a voice that was somewhat tremulous, but full.
"Well, then," said my father, taking one of his hands, "permit one of your old scholars to shake your hand and to inquire how you are.
I have come from Turin to see you."
The old man stared at him in amazement.
Then he said: "You do me too much honor.
I do not know-When were you my scholar?
Excuse me; your name, if you please."
My father mentioned his name, Alberto Bottini, and the year in which he had attended school, and where, and he added: "It is natural that you should not remember me.
But I recollect you so perfectly!"
The master bent his head and gazed at the ground in thought, and muttered my father's name three or four times; the latter, meanwhile, observed him with intent and smiling eyes.
All at once the old man raised his face, with his eyes opened widely, and said slowly: "Alberto Bottini?
the son of Bottini, the engineer?
the one who lived in the Piazza della Consolata?"
"The same," replied my father, extending his hands.
"Then," said the old man, "permit me, my dear sir, permit me"; and advancing, he embraced my father: his white head hardly reached the latter's shoulder.
My father pressed his cheek to the other's brow.
"Have the goodness to come with me," said the teacher.
And without speaking further he turned about and took the road to his dwelling.
In a few minutes we arrived at a garden plot in front of a tiny house with two doors, round one of which there was a fragment of whitewashed wall.
The teacher opened the second and ushered us into a room.
There were four white walls: in one corner a cot bed with a blue and white checked coverlet; in another, a small table with a little library; four chairs, and one ancient geographical map nailed to the wall.
A pleasant odor of apples was perceptible.
We seated ourselves, all three.
My father and his teacher remained silent for several minutes.
"Bottini!"
exclaimed the master at length, fixing his eyes on the brick floor where the sunlight formed a checker-board.
"Oh!
I remember well!
Your mother was such a good woman!
For a while, during your first year, you sat on a bench to the left near the window.
Let us see whether I do not recall it.
I can still see your curly head."
Then he thought for a while longer.
"You were a lively lad, eh?
Very.
The second year you had an attack of croup.
I remember when they brought you back to school, emaciated and wrapped up in a shawl.
Forty years have elapsed since then, have they not?
You are very kind to remember your poor teacher.
And do you know, others of my old pupils have come hither in years gone by to seek me out: there was a colonel, and there were some priests, and several gentlemen."
He asked my father what his profession was.
Then he said, "I am glad, heartily glad.
I thank you.
It is quite a while now since I have seen any one.
I very much fear that you will be the last, my dear sir."
"Don't say that," exclaimed my father.
"You are well and still vigorous.
You must not say that."
"Eh, no!"
replied the master; "do you see this trembling?"
and he showed us his hands.
"This is a bad sign.
It seized on me three years ago, while I was still teaching school.
At first I paid no attention to it; I thought it would pass off.
But instead of that, it stayed and kept on increasing.
A day came when I could no longer write.
Ah!
that day on which I, for the first time, made a blot on the copy-book of one of my scholars was a stab in the heart for me, my dear sir.
I did drag on for a while longer; but I was at the end of my strength.
After sixty years of teaching I was forced to bid farewell to my school, to my scholars, to work.
And it was hard, you understand, hard.
The last time that I gave a lesson, all the scholars accompanied me home, and made much of me; but I was sad; I understood that my life was finished.
I had lost my wife the year before, and my only son.
I had only two peasant grandchildren left.
Now I am living on a pension of a few hundred lire.
I no longer do anything; it seems to me as though the days would never come to an end.
My only occupation, you see, is to turn over my old schoolbooks, my scholastic journals, and a few volumes that have been given to me.
There they are," he said, indicating his little library; "there are my reminiscences, my whole past; I have nothing else remaining to me in the world."
Then in a tone that was suddenly joyous, "I want to give you a surprise, my dear Signor Bottini."
He rose, and approaching his desk, he opened a long casket which contained numerous little parcels, all tied up with a slender cord, and on each was written a date in four figures.
After a little search, he opened one, turned over several papers, drew forth a yellowed sheet, and handed it to my father.
It was some of his school work of forty years before.
At the top was written, Alberto Bottini, Dictation, April 3, 1838.
My father instantly recognized his own large, schoolboy hand, and began to read it with a smile.
But all at once his eyes grew moist.
I rose and inquired the cause.
He threw one arm around my body, and pressing me to his side, he said: "Look at this sheet of paper.
Do you see?
These are the corrections made by my poor mother.
She always strengthened my l 's and my t 's.
And the last lines are entirely hers.
She had learned to imitate my characters; and when I was tired and sleepy, she finished my work for me.
My sainted mother!"
And he kissed the page.
"See here," said the teacher, showing him the other packages; "these are my reminiscences.
Each year I laid aside one piece of work of each of my pupils; and they are all here, dated and arranged in order.
Every time that I open them thus, and read a line here and there, a thousand things recur to my mind, and I seem to be living once more in the days that are past.
How many of them have passed, my dear sir!
I close my eyes, and I see behind me face after face, class after class, hundreds and hundreds of boys, and who knows how many of them are already dead!
Many of them I remember well.
I recall distinctly the best and the worst: those who gave me the greatest pleasure, and those who caused me to pass sorrowful moments; for I have had serpents, too, among that vast number!
But now, you understand, it is as though I were already in the other world, and I love them all equally."
He sat down again, and took one of my hands in his.
"And tell me," my father said, with a smile, "do you not recall any roguish tricks?"
"Of yours, sir?"
replied the old man, also with a smile.
"No; not just at this moment.
But that does not in the least mean that you never played any.
However, you had good judgment; you were serious for your age.
I remember the great affection of your mother for you.
But it is very kind and polite of you to have come to seek me out.
How could you leave your occupations, to come and see a poor old schoolmaster?"
"Listen, Signor Crosetti," responded my father with vivacity.
"I recollect the first time that my poor mother accompanied me to school.
It was to be her first parting from me for two hours; of letting me out of the house alone, in other hands than my father's; in the hands of a stranger, in short.
To this good creature my entrance into school was like my entrance into the world, the first of a long series of necessary and painful separations; it was society which was tearing her son from her for the first time, never again to return him to her intact.
She was much affected; so was I. I bade her farewell with a trembling voice, and then, as she went away, I saluted her once more through the glass in the door, with my eyes full of tears.
And just at that point you made a gesture with one hand, laying the other on your breast, as though to say, 'Trust me, signora.'
Well, the gesture, the glance, from which I perceived that you had comprehended all the sentiments, all the thoughts of my mother; that look which seemed to say, 'Courage!'
that gesture which was an honest promise of protection, of affection, of indulgence, I have never forgotten; it has remained forever engraved on my heart; and it is that memory which induced me to set out from Turin.
And here I am, after the lapse of four and forty years, for the purpose of saying to you, 'Thanks, dear teacher.'"
The master did not reply; he stroked my hair with his hand, and his hand trembled, and glided from my hair to my forehead, from my forehead to my shoulder.
In the meanwhile, my father was surveying those bare walls, that wretched bed, the morsel of bread and the little phial of oil which lay on the window-sill, and he seemed desirous of saying, "Poor master!
after sixty years of teaching, is this all thy recompense?"
But the good old man was content, and began once more to talk with vivacity of our family, of the other teachers of that day, and of my father's schoolmates; some of them he remembered, and some of them he did not; and each told the other news of this one or of that one.
When my father interrupted the conversation, to beg the old man to come down into the town and lunch with us, he replied effusively, "I thank you, I thank you," but he seemed undecided.
My father took him by both hands, and besought him afresh.
"But how shall I manage to eat," said the master, "with these poor hands which shake in this way?
It is a penance for others also."
"We will help you, master," said my father.
And then he accepted, as he shook his head and smiled.
"This is a beautiful day," he said, as he closed the outer door, "a beautiful day, dear Signor Bottini!
I assure you that I shall remember it as long as I live."
My father gave one arm to the master, and the latter took me by the hand, and we descended the lane.
We met two little barefooted girls leading some cows, and a boy who passed us on a run, with a huge load of straw on his shoulders.
The master told us that they were scholars of the second grade; that in the morning they led the cattle to pasture, and worked in the fields barefoot; and in the afternoon they put on their shoes and went to school.
It was nearly mid-day.
We encountered no one else.
In a few minutes we reached the inn, seated ourselves at a large table, with the master between us, and began our breakfast at once.
The inn was as silent as a convent.
The master was very merry, and his excitement augmented his palsy: he could hardly eat.
But my father cut up his meat, broke his bread, and put salt on his plate.
In order to drink, he was obliged to hold the glass with both hands, and even then he struck his teeth.
But he talked constantly, and with ardor, of the reading-books of his young days; of the notaries of the present day; of the commendations bestowed on him by his superiors; of the regulations of late years: and all with that serene countenance, a trifle redder than at first, and with that gay voice of his, and that laugh which was almost the laugh of a young man.
And my father gazed and gazed at him, with that same expression with which I sometimes catch him gazing at me, at home, when he is thinking and smiling to himself, with his face turned aside.
The teacher allowed some wine to trickle down on his breast; my father rose, and wiped it off with his napkin.
"No, sir; I cannot permit this," the old man said, and smiled.
He said some words in Latin.
And, finally, he raised his glass, which wavered about in his hand, and said very gravely, "To your health, my dear engineer, to that of your children, to the memory of your good mother!"
"To yours, my good master!"
replied my father, pressing his hand.
And at the end of the room stood the innkeeper and several others, watching us, and smiling as though they were pleased at this attention which was being shown to the teacher from their parts.
At a little after two o'clock we came out, and the master wanted to escort us to the station.
My father gave him his arm once more, and he again took me by the hand: I carried his cane for him.
The people paused to look on, for they all knew him: some saluted him.
At one point in the street we heard, through an open window, many boys' voices, reading together, and spelling.
The old man halted, and seemed to be saddened by it.
"This, my dear Signor Bottini," he said, "is what pains me.
To hear the voices of boys in school, and not be there any more; to think that another man is there.
I have heard that music for sixty years, and I have grown to love it.
Now I am deprived of my family.
I have no sons."
"No, master," my father said to him, starting on again; "you still have many sons, scattered about the world, who remember you, as I have always remembered you."
"No, no," replied the master sadly; "I have no longer a school; I have no longer any sons.
And without sons, I shall not live much longer.
My hour will soon strike."
"Do not say that, master; do not think it," said my father.
"You have done so much good in every way!
You have put your life to such a noble use!"
The aged master inclined his hoary head for an instant on my father's shoulder, and pressed my hand.
We entered the station.
The train was on the point of starting.
"Farewell, master!"
said my father, kissing him on both cheeks.
"Farewell!
thanks!
farewell!"
replied the master, taking one of my father's hands in his two trembling hands, and pressing it to his heart.
Then I kissed him and felt that his face was bathed in tears.
My father pushed me into the railway carriage, and at the moment of starting he quickly removed the coarse cane from the schoolmaster's hand, and in its place he put his own handsome one, with a silver handle and his initials, saying, "Keep it in memory of me."
The old man tried to return it and to recover his own; but my father was already inside and had closed the door.
"Farewell, my kind master!"
"Farewell, my son!"
responded the master as the train moved off; "and may God bless you for the consolation which you have afforded to a poor old man!"
"Until we meet again!"
cried my father, in a voice full of emotion.
But the master shook his head, as much as to say, "We shall never see each other more."
"Yes, yes," repeated my father, "until we meet again!"
And the other replied by raising his trembling hand to heaven, "Up there!"
And thus he disappeared from our sight, with his hand on high.
Thursday, 20th.
Who could have told me, when I returned from that delightful excursion with my father, that for ten days I should not see the country or the sky again?
I have been very ill-in danger of my life.
I have heard my mother sobbing-I have seen my father very, very pale, gazing intently at me; and my sister Silvia and my brother talking in a low voice; and the doctor, with his spectacles, who was there every moment, and who said things to me that I did not understand.
In truth, I have been on the verge of saying a final farewell to every one.
Ah, my poor mother!
I passed three or four days at least, of which I recollect almost nothing, as though I had been in a dark and perplexing dream.
I thought I beheld at my bedside my kind schoolmistress of the upper primary, who was trying to stifle her cough in her handkerchief in order not to disturb me.
In the same manner I confusedly recall my master, who bent over to kiss me, and who pricked my face a little with his beard; and I saw, as in a mist, the red head of Crossi, the golden curls of Derossi, the Calabrian clad in black, all pass by, and Garrone, who brought me a mandarin orange with its leaves, and ran away in haste because his mother is ill.
Then I awoke as from a very long dream, and understood that I was better from seeing my father and mother smiling, and hearing Silvia singing softly.
Oh, what a sad dream it was!
Then I began to improve every day.
The little mason came and made me laugh once more for the first time, with his hare's face; and how well he does it, now that his face is somewhat elongated through illness, poor fellow!
And Coretti came; and Garoffi came to present me with two tickets in his new lottery of "a penknife with five surprises," which he purchased of a second-hand dealer in the Via Bertola.
Then, yesterday, while I was asleep, Precossi came and laid his cheek on my hand without waking me; and as he came from his father's workshop, with his face covered with coal dust, he left a black print on my sleeve, the sight of which caused me great pleasure when I awoke.
How green the trees have become in these few days!
And how I envy the boys whom I see running to school with their books when my father carries me to the window!
But I shall go back there soon myself.
I am so impatient to see all the boys once more, and my seat, the garden, the streets; to know all that has taken place during the interval; to apply myself to my books again, and to my copy-books, which I seem not to have seen for a year!
How pale and thin my poor mother has grown!
Poor father!
how weary he looks!
And my kind companions who came to see me and walked on tiptoe and kissed my brow!
It makes me sad, even now, to think that one day we must part.
Perhaps I shall continue my studies with Derossi and with some others; but how about all the rest?
When the fourth grade is once finished, then good by!
we shall never see each other again: I shall never see them again at my bedside when I am ill,-Garrone, Precossi, Coretti, who are such fine boys and kind and dear comrades,-never more!
Thursday, 20th.
Why "never more," Enrico?
That will depend on yourself.
When you have finished the fourth grade, you will go to the Gymnasium, and they will become workingmen; but you will remain in the same city for many years, perhaps.
Why, then, will you never meet again?
When you are in the University or the Lyceum, you will seek them out in their shops or their workrooms, and it will be a great pleasure for you to meet the companions of your youth once more, as men at work.
I should like to see you neglecting to look up Coretti or Precossi, wherever they may be!
And you will go to them, and you will pass hours in their company, and you will see, when you come to study life and the world, how many things you can learn from them, which no one else is capable of teaching you, both about their arts and their society and your own country.
And have a care; for if you do not preserve these friendships, it will be extremely difficult for you to acquire other similar ones in the future,-friendships, I mean to say, outside of the class to which you belong; and thus you will live in one class only; and the man who associates with but one social class is like the student who reads but one book.
Let it be your firm resolve, then, from this day forth, that you will keep these good friends even after you shall be separated, and from this time forth, cultivate precisely these by preference because they are the sons of workingmen.
You see, men of the upper classes are the officers, and men of the lower classes are the soldiers of toil; and thus in society as in the army, not only is the soldier no less noble than the officer, since nobility consists in work and not in wages, in valor and not in rank; but if there is also a superiority of merit, it is on the side of the soldier, of the workmen, who draw the lesser profit from the work.
Therefore love and respect above all others, among your companions, the sons of the soldiers of labor; honor in them the toil and the sacrifices of their parents; disregard the differences of fortune and of class, upon which the base alone regulate their sentiments and courtesy; reflect that from the veins of laborers in the shops and in the country issued nearly all that blessed blood which has redeemed your country; love Garrone, love Coretti, love Precossi, love your little mason, who, in their little workingmen's breasts, possess the hearts of princes; and take an oath to yourself that no change of fortune shall ever eradicate these friendships of childhood from your soul.
Swear to yourself that forty years hence, if, while passing through a railway station, you recognize your old Garrone in the garments of an engineer, with a black face,-ah!
I cannot think what to tell you to swear.
I am sure that you will jump upon the engine and fling your arms round his neck, though you were even a senator of the kingdom.
THY FATHER.
Saturday, 29th.
On my return to school, the first thing I heard was some bad news.
Garrone had not been there for several days because his mother was seriously ill. She died on Saturday.
Yesterday morning, as soon as we came into school, the teacher said to us:-
"The greatest misfortune that can happen to a boy has happened to poor Garrone: his mother is dead.
He will return to school to-morrow.
I beseech you now, boys, respect the terrible sorrow that is now rending his soul.
When he enters, greet him with affection, and gravely; let no one jest, let no one laugh at him, I beg of you."
And this morning poor Garrone came in, a little later than the rest; I felt a blow at my heart at the sight of him.
His face was haggard, his eyes were red, and he was unsteady on his feet; it seemed as though he had been ill for a month.
I hardly recognized him; he was dressed all in black; he aroused our pity.
No one even breathed; all gazed at him.
No sooner had he entered than at the first sight of that schoolroom whither his mother had come to get him nearly every day, of that bench over which she had bent on so many examination days to give him a last bit of advice, and where he had so many times thought of her, in his impatience to run out and meet her, he burst into a desperate fit of weeping.
The teacher drew him aside to his own place, and pressed him to his breast, and said to him:-
"Weep, weep, my poor boy; but take courage.
Your mother is no longer here; but she sees you, she still loves you, she still lives by your side, and one day you will behold her once again, for you have a good and upright soul like her own.
Take courage!"
Having said this, he accompanied him to the bench near me.
I dared not look at him.
He drew out his copy-books and his books, which he had not opened for many days, and as he opened the reading-book at a place where there was a cut representing a mother leading her son by the hand, he burst out crying again, and laid his head on his arm.
The master made us a sign to leave him thus, and began the lesson.
I should have liked to say something to him, but I did not know what.
I laid one hand on his arm, and whispered in his ear:-
"Don't cry, Garrone."
He made no reply, and without raising his head from the bench he laid his hand on mine and kept it there a while.
At the close of school, no one addressed him; all the boys hovered round him respectfully, and in silence.
I saw my mother waiting for me, and ran to embrace her; but she repulsed me, and gazed at Garrone.
For the moment I could not understand why; but then I perceived that Garrone was standing apart by himself and gazing at me; and he was gazing at me with a look of indescribable sadness, which seemed to say: "You are embracing your mother, and I shall never embrace mine again!
You have still a mother, and mine is dead!"
And then I understood why my mother had thrust me back, and I went out without taking her hand.
Saturday, 29th.
This morning, also, Garrone came to school with a pale face and his eyes swollen with weeping, and he hardly cast a glance at the little gifts which we had placed on his desk to console him.
But the teacher had brought a page from a book to read to him in order to encourage him.
He first informed us that we are to go to-morrow at one o'clock to the town-hall to witness the award of the medal for civic valor to a boy who has saved a little child from the Po, and that on Monday he will dictate the description of the festival to us instead of the monthly story.
Then turning to Garrone, who was standing with drooping head, he said to him:-
"Make an effort, Garrone, and write down what I dictate to you as well as the rest."
We all took our pens, and the teacher dictated.
"Giuseppe Mazzini, born in Genoa in 1805, died in Pisa in 1872, a grand, patriotic soul, the mind of a great writer, the first inspirer and apostle of the Italian Revolution; who, out of love for his country, lived for forty years poor, exiled, persecuted, a fugitive heroically steadfast in his principles and in his resolutions.
Giuseppe Mazzini, who adored his mother, and who derived from her all that there was noblest and purest in her strong and gentle soul, wrote as follows to a faithful friend of his, to console him in the greatest of misfortunes.
These are almost his exact words:-
"'My friend, thou wilt never more behold thy mother on this earth.
That is the terrible truth.
I do not attempt to see thee, because thine is one of those solemn and sacred sorrows which each must suffer and conquer for himself.
Dost thou understand what I mean to convey by these words, It is necessary to conquer sorrow -to conquer the least sacred, the least purifying part of sorrow, that which, instead of rendering the soul better, weakens and debases it?
But the other part of sorrow, the noble part-that which enlarges and elevates the soul-that must remain with thee and never leave thee more.
Nothing here below can take the place of a good mother.
In the griefs, in the consolations which life may still bring to thee, thou wilt never forget her.
But thou must recall her, love her, mourn her death, in a manner which is worthy of her.
O my friend, hearken to me!
Death exists not; it is nothing.
It cannot even be understood.
Life is life, and it follows the law of life-progress.
Yesterday thou hadst a mother on earth; to-day thou hast an angel elsewhere.
All that is good will survive the life of earth with increased power.
Hence, also, the love of thy mother.
She loves thee now more than ever.
And thou art responsible for thy actions to her more, even, than before.
It depends upon thee, upon thy actions, to meet her once more, to see her in another existence.
Thou must, therefore, out of love and reverence for thy mother, grow better and cause her joy for thee.
Henceforth thou must say to thyself at every act of thine, "Would my mother approve this?"
Her transformation has placed a guardian angel in the world for thee, to whom thou must refer in all thy affairs, in everything that pertains to thee.
Be strong and brave; fight against desperate and vulgar grief; have the tranquillity of great suffering in great souls; and that it is what she would have.'"
"Garrone," added the teacher, " be strong and tranquil, for that is what she would have.
Do you understand?"
Garrone nodded assent, while great and fast-flowing tears streamed over his hands, his copy-book, and his desk.
(Monthly Story.)
At one o'clock we went with our schoolmaster to the front of the town-hall, to see the medal for civic valor bestowed on the lad who saved one of his comrades from the Po.
On the front terrace waved a huge tricolored flag.
We entered the courtyard of the palace.
It was already full of people.
At the further end of it there was visible a table with a red cover, and papers on it, and behind it a row of gilded chairs for the mayor and the council; the ushers of the municipality were there, with their under-waistcoats of sky-blue and their white stockings.
To the right of the courtyard a detachment of policemen, who had a great many medals, was drawn up in line; and beside them a detachment of custom-house officers; on the other side were the firemen in festive array; and numerous soldiers not in line, who had come to look on,-cavalrymen, sharpshooters, artillery-men.
Then all around were gentlemen, country people, and some officers and women and boys who had assembled.
We crowded into a corner where many scholars from other buildings were already collected with their teachers; and near us was a group of boys belonging to the common people, between ten and eighteen years of age, who were talking and laughing loudly; and we made out that they were all from Borgo Po, comrades or acquaintances of the boy who was to receive the medal.
Above, all the windows were thronged with the employees of the city government; the balcony of the library was also filled with people, who pressed against the balustrade; and in the one on the opposite side, which is over the entrance gate, stood a crowd of girls from the public schools, and many Daughters of military men, with their pretty blue veils.
It looked like a theatre.
All were talking merrily, glancing every now and then at the red table, to see whether any one had made his appearance.
A band of music was playing softly at the extremity of the portico.
The sun beat down on the lofty walls.
It was beautiful.
All at once every one began to clap their hands, from the courtyard, from the balconies, from the windows.
I raised myself on tiptoe to look.
The crowd which stood behind the red table had parted, and a man and woman had come forward.
The man was leading a boy by the hand.
This was the lad who had saved his comrade.
The man was his father, a mason, dressed in his best.
The woman, his mother, small and blond, had on a black gown.
The boy, also small and blond, had on a gray jacket.
At the sight of all those people, and at the sound of that thunder of applause, all three stood still, not daring to look nor to move.
A municipal usher pushed them along to the side of the table on the right.
All remained quiet for a moment, and then once more the applause broke out on all sides.
The boy glanced up at the windows, and then at the balcony with the Daughters of military men; he held his cap in his hand, and did not seem to understand very thoroughly where he was.
It struck me that he looked a little like Coretti, in the face; but he was redder.
His father and mother kept their eyes fixed on the table.
In the meantime, all the boys from Borgo Po who were near us were making motions to their comrade, to attract his attention, and hailing him in a low tone: Pin!
Pin!
Pinot!
By dint of calling they made themselves heard.
The boy glanced at them, and hid his smile behind his cap.
At a certain moment the guards put themselves in the attitude of attention.
The mayor entered, accompanied by numerous gentlemen.
The mayor, all white, with a big tricolored scarf, placed himself beside the table, standing; all the others took their places behind and beside him.
The band ceased playing; the mayor made a sign, and every one kept quiet.
He began to speak.
I did not understand the first words perfectly; but I gathered that he was telling the story of the boy's feat.
Then he raised his voice, and it rang out so clear and sonorous through the whole court, that I did not lose another word: "When he saw, from the shore, his comrade struggling in the river, already overcome with the fear of death, he tore the clothes from his back, and hastened to his assistance, without hesitating an instant.
They shouted to him, 'You will be drowned!
'-he made no reply; they caught hold of him-he freed himself; they called him by name-he was already in the water.
The river was swollen; the risk terrible, even for a man.
But he flung himself to meet death with all the strength of his little body and of his great heart; he reached the unfortunate fellow and seized him just in time, when he was already under water, and dragged him to the surface; he fought furiously with the waves, which strove to overwhelm him, with his companion who tried to cling to him; and several times he disappeared beneath the water, and rose again with a desperate effort; obstinate, invincible in his purpose, not like a boy who was trying to save another boy, but like a man, like a father who is struggling to save his son, who is his hope and his life.
In short, God did not permit so generous a prowess to be displayed in vain.
The child swimmer tore the victim from the gigantic river, and brought him to land, and with the assistance of others, rendered him his first succor; after which he returned home quietly and alone, and ingenuously narrated his deed.
"Gentlemen, beautiful, and worthy of veneration is heroism in a man!
But in a child, in whom there can be no prompting of ambition or of profit whatever; in a child, who must have all the more ardor in proportion as he has less strength; in a child, from whom we require nothing, who is bound to nothing, who already appears to us so noble and lovable, not when he acts, but when he merely understands, and is grateful for the sacrifices of others;-in a child, heroism is divine!
I will say nothing more, gentlemen.
I do not care to deck, with superfluous praises, such simple grandeur.
Here before you stands the noble and valorous rescuer.
Soldier, greet him as a brother; mothers, bless him like a son; children, remember his name, engrave on your minds his visage, that it may nevermore be erased from your memories and from your hearts.
Approach, my boy.
In the name of the king of Italy, I give you the medal for civic valor."
An extremely loud hurrah, uttered at the same moment by many voices, made the palace ring.
The mayor took the medal from the table, and fastened it on the boy's breast.
Then he embraced and kissed him.
The mother placed one hand over her eyes; the father held his chin on his breast.
The mayor shook hands with both; and taking the decree of decoration, which was bound with a ribbon, he handed it to the woman.
Then he turned to the boy again, and said: "May the memory of this day, which is such a glorious one for you, such a happy one for your father and mother, keep you all your life in the path of virtue and honor!
Farewell!"
The mayor withdrew, the band struck up, and everything seemed to be at an end, when the detachment of firemen opened, and a lad of eight or nine years, pushed forwards by a woman who instantly concealed herself, rushed towards the boy with the decoration, and flung himself in his arms.
Another outburst of hurrahs and applause made the courtyard echo; every one had instantly understood that this was the boy who had been saved from the Po, and who had come to thank his rescuer.
After kissing him, he clung to one arm, in order to accompany him out.
These two, with the father and mother following behind, took their way towards the door, making a path with difficulty among the people who formed in line to let them pass,-policemen, boys, soldiers, women, all mingled together in confusion.
All pressed forwards and raised on tiptoe to see the boy.
Those who stood near him as he passed, touched his hand.
When he passed before the schoolboys, they all waved their caps in the air.
Those from Borgo Po made a great uproar, pulling him by the arms and by his jacket and shouting. "
Pin!
hurrah for Pin!
bravo, Pinot! "
I saw him pass very close to me.
His face was all aflame and happy; his medal had a red, white, and green ribbon.
His mother was crying and smiling; his father was twirling his mustache with one hand, which trembled violently, as though he had a fever.
And from the windows and the balconies the people continued to lean out and applaud.
All at once, when they were on the point of entering the portico, there descended from the balcony of the Daughters of military men a veritable shower of pansies, of bunches of violets and daisies, which fell upon the head of the boy, and of his father and mother, and scattered over the ground.
Many people stooped to pick them up and hand them to the mother.
And the band at the further end of the courtyard played, very, very softly, a most entrancing air, which seemed like a song by a great many silver voices fading slowly into the distance on the banks of a river.
Friday, 5th.
TO-DAY I took a vacation, because I was not well, and my mother took me to the Institution for Children with the Rickets, whither she went to recommend a child belonging to our porter; but she did not allow me to go into the school.
You did not understand, Enrico, why I did not permit you to enter?
In order not to place before the eyes of those unfortunates, there in the midst of the school, as though on exhibition, a healthy, robust boy: they have already but too many opportunities for making melancholy comparisons.
What a sad thing!
Tears rushed from my heart when I entered.
There were sixty of them, boys and girls.
Poor tortured bones!
Poor hands, poor little shrivelled and distorted feet!
Poor little deformed bodies!
I instantly perceived many charming faces, with eyes full of intelligence and affection.
There was one little child's face with a pointed nose and a sharp chin, which seemed to belong to an old woman; but it wore a smile of celestial sweetness.
Some, viewed from the front, are handsome, and appear to be without defects: but when they turn round-they cast a weight upon your soul.
The doctor was there, visiting them.
He set them upright on their benches and pulled up their little garments, to feel their little swollen stomachs and enlarged joints; but they felt not the least shame, poor creatures!
it was evident that they were children who were used to being undressed, examined, turned round on all sides.
And to think that they are now in the best stage of their malady, when they hardly suffer at all any more!
But who can say what they suffered during the first stage, while their bodies were undergoing the process of deformation, when with the increase of their infirmity, they saw affection decrease around them, poor children!
saw themselves left alone for hour after hour in a corner of the room or the courtyard, badly nourished, and at times scoffed at, or tormented for months by bandages and by useless orthopedic apparatus!
Now, however, thanks to care and good food and gymnastic exercises, many are improving.
Their schoolmistress makes them practise gymnastics.
It was a pitiful sight to see them, at a certain command, extend all those bandaged legs under the benches, squeezed as they were between splints, knotty and deformed; legs which should have been covered with kisses!
Some could not rise from the bench, and remained there, with their heads resting on their arms, caressing their crutches with their hands; others, on making the thrust with their arms, felt their breath fail them, and fell back on their seats, all pale; but they smiled to conceal their panting.
Ah, Enrico!
you other children do not prize your good health, and it seems to you so small a thing to be well!
I thought of the strong and thriving lads, whom their mothers carry about in triumph, proud of their beauty; and I could have clasped all those poor little heads, I could have pressed them to my heart, in despair; I could have said, had I been alone, "I will never stir from here again; I wish to consecrate my life to you, to serve you, to be a mother to you all, to my last day."
And in the meantime, they sang; sang in peculiar, thin, sweet, sad voices, which penetrated the soul; and when their teacher praised them, they looked happy; and as she passed among the benches, they kissed her hands and wrists; for they are very grateful for what is done for them, and very affectionate.
And these little angels have good minds, and study well, the teacher told me.
The teacher is young and gentle, with a face full of kindness, a certain expression of sadness, like a reflection of the misfortunes which she caresses and comforts.
The dear girl!
Among all the human creatures who earn their livelihood by toil, there is not one who earns it more holily than thou, my daughter!
THY MOTHER.
Tuesday, 9th.
My mother is good, and my sister Silvia is like her, and has a large and noble heart.
Yesterday evening I was copying a part of the monthly story, From the Apennines to the Andes,-which the teacher has distributed among us all in small portions to copy, because it is so long,-when Silvia entered on tiptoe, and said to me hastily, and in a low voice: "Come to mamma with me.
I heard them talking together this morning: some affair has gone wrong with papa, and he was sad; mamma was encouraging him: we are in difficulties-do you understand?
We have no more money.
Papa said that it would be necessary to make some sacrifices in order to recover himself.
Now we must make sacrifices, too, must we not?
Are you ready to do it?
Well, I will speak to mamma, and do you nod assent, and promise her on your honor that you will do everything that I shall say."
Having said this, she took me by the hand and led me to our mother, who was sewing, absorbed in thought.
I sat down on one end of the sofa, Silvia on the other, and she immediately said:-
"Listen, mamma, I have something to say to you.
Both of us have something to say to you."
Mamma stared at us in surprise, and Silvia began:-
"Papa has no money, has he?"
"What are you saying?"
replied mamma, turning crimson.
"Has he not indeed!
What do you know about it?
Who has told you?"
"I know it," said Silvia, resolutely.
"Well, then, listen, mamma; we must make some sacrifices, too.
You promised me a fan at the end of May, and Enrico expected his box of paints; we don't want anything now; we don't want to waste a soldo; we shall be just as well pleased-you understand?"
Mamma tried to speak; but Silvia said: "No; it must be thus.
We have decided.
And until papa has money again, we don't want any fruit or anything else; broth will be enough for us, and we will eat bread in the morning for breakfast: thus we shall spend less on the table, for we already spend too much; and we promise you that you will always find us perfectly contented.
Is it not so, Enrico?"
I replied that it was.
"Always perfectly contented," repeated Silvia, closing mamma's mouth with one hand.
"And if there are any other sacrifices to be made, either in the matter of clothing or anything else, we will make them gladly; and we will even sell our presents; I will give up all my things, I will serve you as your maid, we will not have anything done out of the house any more, I will work all day long with you, I will do everything you wish, I am ready for anything!
For anything!"
she exclaimed, throwing her arms around my mother's neck, "if papa and mamma can only be saved further troubles, if I can only behold you both once more at ease, and in good spirits, as in former days, between your Silvia and your Enrico, who love you so dearly, who would give their lives for you!"
Ah!
I have never seen my mother so happy as she was on hearing these words; she never before kissed us on the brow in that way, weeping and laughing, and incapable of speech.
And then she assured Silvia that she had not understood rightly; that we were not in the least reduced in circumstances, as she imagined; and she thanked us a hundred times, and was cheerful all the evening, until my father came in, when she told him all about it.
He did not open his mouth, poor father!
But this morning, as we sat at the table, I felt at once both a great pleasure and a great sadness: under my napkin I found my box of colors, and under hers, Silvia found her fan.
Thursday, 11th.
This morning I had finished copying my share of the story, From the Apennines to the Andes, and was seeking for a theme for the independent composition which the teacher had assigned us to write, when I heard an unusual talking on the stairs, and shortly after two firemen entered the house, and asked permission of my father to inspect the stoves and chimneys, because a smoke-pipe was on fire on the roof, and they could not tell to whom it belonged.
My father said, "Pray do so."
And although we had no fire burning anywhere, they began to make the round of our apartments, and to lay their ears to the walls, to hear if the fire was roaring in the flues which run up to the other floors of the house.
And while they were going through the rooms, my father said to me, "Here is a theme for your composition, Enrico,-the firemen.
Try to write down what I am about to tell you.
"I saw them at work two years ago, one evening, when I was coming out of the Balbo Theatre late at night.
On entering the Via Roma, I saw an unusual light, and a crowd of people collecting.
A house was on fire.
Tongues of flame and clouds of smoke were bursting from the windows and the roof; men and women appeared at the windows and then disappeared, uttering shrieks of despair.
There was a dense throng in front of the door: the crowd was shouting: 'They will be burned alive!
Help!
The firemen!'
At that moment a carriage arrived, four firemen sprang out of it-the first who had reached the town-hall-and rushed into the house.
They had hardly gone in when a horrible thing happened: a woman ran to a window of the third story, with a yell, clutched the balcony, climbed down it, and remained suspended, thus clinging, almost suspended in space, with her back outwards, bending beneath the flames, which flashed out from the room and almost licked her head.
The crowd uttered a cry of horror.
The firemen, who had been stopped on the second floor by mistake by the terrified lodgers, had already broken through a wall and precipitated themselves into a room, when a hundred shouts gave them warning:-
"'On the third floor!
On the third floor!'
"They flew to the third floor.
There there was an infernal uproar,-beams from the roof crashing in, corridors filled with a suffocating smoke.
In order to reach the rooms where the lodgers were imprisoned, there was no other way left but to pass over the roof.
They instantly sprang upon it, and a moment later something which resembled a black phantom appeared on the tiles, in the midst of the smoke.
It was the corporal, who had been the first to arrive.
But in order to get from the roof to the small set of rooms cut off by the fire, he was forced to pass over an extremely narrow space comprised between a dormer window and the eavestrough: all the rest was in flames, and that tiny space was covered with snow and ice, and there was no place to hold on to.
"'It is impossible for him to pass!'
shouted the crowd below.
"The corporal advanced along the edge of the roof.
All shuddered, and began to observe him with bated breath.
He passed.
A tremendous hurrah rose towards heaven.
The corporal resumed his way, and on arriving at the point which was threatened, he began to break away, with furious blows of his axe, beams, tiles, and rafters, in order to open a hole through which he might descend within.
"In the meanwhile, the woman was still suspended outside the window.
The fire raged with increased violence over her head; another moment, and she would have fallen into the street.
"The hole was opened.
We saw the corporal pull off his shoulder-belt and lower himself inside: the other firemen, who had arrived, followed.
"At that instant a very lofty Porta ladder, which had just arrived, was placed against the entablature of the house, in front of the windows whence issued flames, and howls, as of maniacs.
But it seemed as though they were too late.
"'No one can be saved now!'
they shouted.
'The firemen are burning!
The end has come!
They are dead!'
"All at once the black form of the corporal made its appearance at the window with the balcony, lighted up by the flames overhead.
The woman clasped him round the neck; he caught her round the body with both arms, drew her up, and laid her down inside the room.
"The crowd set up a shout a thousand voices strong, which rose above the roar of the conflagration.
"But the others?
And how were they to get down?
The ladder which leaned against the roof on the front of another window was at a good distance from them.
How could they get hold of it?
"While the people were saying this to themselves, one of the firemen stepped out of the window, set his right foot on the window-sill and his left on the ladder, and standing thus upright in the air, he grasped the lodgers, one after the other, as the other men handed them to him from within, passed them on to a comrade, who had climbed up from the street, and who, after securing a firm grasp for them on the rungs, sent them down, one after the other, with the assistance of more firemen.
"First came the woman of the balcony, then a baby, then another woman, then an old man.
All were saved.
After the old man, the fireman who had remained inside descended.
The last to come down was the corporal who had been the first to hasten up.
The crowd received them all with a burst of applause; but when the last made his appearance, the vanguard of the rescuers, the one who had faced the abyss in advance of the rest, the one who would have perished had it been fated that one should perish, the crowd saluted him like a conqueror, shouting and stretching out their arms, with an affectionate impulse of admiration and of gratitude, and in a few minutes his obscure name-Giuseppe Robbino-rang from a thousand throats.
"Have you understood?
That is courage-the courage of the heart, which does not reason, which does not waver, which dashes blindly on, like a lightning flash, wherever it hears the cry of a dying man.
One of these days I will take you to the exercises of the firemen, and I will point out to you Corporal Robbino; for you would be very glad to know him, would you not?"
I replied that I should.
"Here he is," said my father.
I turned round with a start.
The two firemen, having completed their inspection, were traversing the room in order to reach the door.
My father pointed to the smaller of the men, who had straps of gold braid, and said, "Shake hands with Corporal Robbino."
The corporal halted, and offered me his hand; I pressed it; he made a salute and withdrew.
"And bear this well in mind," said my father; "for out of the thousands of hands which you will shake in the course of your life there will probably not be ten which possess the worth of his."
(Monthly Story.)
Many years ago a Genoese lad of thirteen, the son of a workingman, went from Genoa to America all alone to seek his mother.
His mother had gone two years before to Buenos Ayres, a city, the capital of the Argentine Republic, to take service in a wealthy family, and to thus earn in a short time enough to place her family once more in easy circumstances, they having fallen, through various misfortunes, into poverty and debt.
There are courageous women-not a few-who take this long voyage with this object in view, and who, thanks to the large wages which people in service receive there, return home at the end of a few years with several thousand lire.
The poor mother had wept tears of blood at parting from her children,-the one aged eighteen, the other, eleven; but she had set out courageously and filled with hope.
The voyage was prosperous: she had no sooner arrived at Buenos Ayres than she found, through a Genoese shopkeeper, a cousin of her husband, who had been established there for a very long time, a good Argentine family, which gave high wages and treated her well.
And for a short time she kept up a regular correspondence with her family.
As it had been settled between them, her husband addressed his letters to his cousin, who transmitted them to the woman, and the latter handed her replies to him, and he despatched them to Genoa, adding a few lines of his own.
As she was earning eighty lire a month and spending nothing for herself, she sent home a handsome sum every three months, with which her husband, who was a man of honor, gradually paid off their most urgent debts, and thus regained his good reputation.
And in the meantime, he worked away and was satisfied with the state of his affairs, since he also cherished the hope that his wife would shortly return; for the house seemed empty without her, and the younger son in particular, who was extremely attached to his mother, was very much depressed, and could not resign himself to having her so far away.
But a year had elapsed since they had parted; after a brief letter, in which she said that her health was not very good, they heard nothing more.
They wrote twice to the cousin; the cousin did not reply.
They wrote to the Argentine family where the woman was at service; but it is possible that the letter never reached them, for they had distorted the name in addressing it: they received no answer.
Fearing a misfortune, they wrote to the Italian Consulate at Buenos Ayres to have inquiries made, and after a lapse of three months they received a response from the consul, that in spite of advertisements in the newspapers no one had presented herself nor sent any word.
And it could not have happened otherwise, for this reason if for no other: that with the idea of sparing the good name of her family, which she fancied she was discrediting by becoming a servant, the good woman had not given her real name to the Argentine family.
Several months more passed by; no news.
The father and sons were in consternation; the youngest was oppressed by a melancholy which he could not conquer.
What was to be done?
To whom should they have recourse?
The father's first thought had been to set out, to go to America in search of his wife.
But his work?
Who would support his sons?
And neither could the eldest son go, for he had just then begun to earn something, and he was necessary to the family.
And in this anxiety they lived, repeating each day the same sad speeches, or gazing at each other in silence; when, one evening, Marco, the youngest, declared with decision, "I am going to America to look for my mother."
His father shook his head sadly and made no reply.
It was an affectionate thought, but an impossible thing.
To make a journey to America, which required a month, alone, at the age of thirteen!
But the boy patiently insisted.
He persisted that day, the day after, every day, with great calmness, reasoning with the good sense of a man.
"Others have gone thither," he said; "and smaller boys than I, too.
Once on board the ship, I shall get there like anybody else.
Once arrived there, I only have to hunt up our cousin's shop.
There are plenty of Italians there who will show me the street.
After finding our cousin, my mother is found; and if I do not find him, I will go to the consul: I will search out that Argentine family.
Whatever happens, there is work for all there; I shall find work also; sufficient, at least, to earn enough to get home."
And thus little by little he almost succeeded in persuading his father.
His father esteemed him; he knew that he had good judgment and courage; that he was inured to privations and to sacrifices; and that all these good qualities had acquired double force in his heart in consequence of the sacred project of finding his mother, whom he adored.
In addition to this, the captain of a steamer, the friend of an acquaintance of his, having heard the plan mentioned, undertook to procure a free third-class passage for the Argentine Republic.
And then, after a little hesitation, the father gave his consent.
The voyage was decided on.
They filled a sack with clothes for him, put a few crowns in his pocket, and gave him the address of the cousin; and one fine evening in April they saw him on board.
"Marco, my son," his father said to him, as he gave him his last kiss, with tears in his eyes, on the steps of the steamer, which was on the point of starting, "take courage.
Thou hast set out on a holy undertaking, and God will aid thee."
Poor Marco!
His heart was strong and prepared for the hardest trials of this voyage; but when he beheld his beautiful Genoa disappear on the horizon, and found himself on the open sea on that huge steamer thronged with emigrating peasants, alone, unacquainted with any one, with that little bag which held his entire fortune, a sudden discouragement assailed him.
For two days he remained crouching like a dog on the bows, hardly eating, and oppressed with a great desire to weep.
Every description of sad thoughts passed through his mind, and the saddest, the most terrible, was the one which was the most persistent in its return,-the thought that his mother was dead.
In his broken and painful slumbers he constantly beheld a strange face, which surveyed him with an air of compassion, and whispered in his ear, "Your mother is dead!"
And then he awoke, stifling a shriek.
Nevertheless, after passing the Straits of Gibraltar, at the first sight of the Atlantic Ocean he recovered his spirits a little, and his hope.
But it was only a brief respite.
That vast but always smooth sea, the increasing heat, the misery of all those poor people who surrounded him, the consciousness of his own solitude, overwhelmed him once more.
The empty and monotonous days which succeeded each other became confounded in his memory, as is the case with sick people.
It seemed to him that he had been at sea a year.
And every morning, on waking, he felt surprised afresh at finding himself there alone on that vast watery expanse, on his way to America.
The beautiful flying fish which fell on deck every now and then, the marvellous sunsets of the tropics, with their enormous clouds colored like flame and blood, and those nocturnal phosphorescences which make the ocean seem all on fire like a sea of lava, did not produce on him the effect of real things, but of marvels beheld in a dream.
There were days of bad weather, during which he remained constantly in the dormitory, where everything was rolling and crashing, in the midst of a terrible chorus of lamentations and imprecations, and he thought that his last hour had come.
There were other days, when the sea was calm and yellowish, of insupportable heat, of infinite tediousness; interminable and wretched hours, during which the enervated passengers, stretched motionless on the planks, seemed all dead.
And the voyage was endless: sea and sky, sky and sea; to-day the same as yesterday, to-morrow like to-day, and so on, always, eternally.
And for long hours he stood leaning on the bulwarks, gazing at that interminable sea in amazement, thinking vaguely of his mother, until his eyes closed and his head was drooping with sleep; and then again he beheld that unknown face which gazed upon him with an air of compassion, and repeated in his ear, "Your mother is dead!"
and at the sound of that voice he awoke with a start, to resume his dreaming with wide-open eyes, and to gaze at the unchanging horizon.
The voyage lasted twenty-seven days.
But the last days were the best.
The weather was fine, and the air cool.
He had made the acquaintance of a good old man, a Lombard, who was going to America to find his son, an agriculturist in the vicinity of the town of Rosario; he had told him his whole story, and the old man kept repeating every little while, as he tapped him on the nape of the neck with his hand, "Courage, my lad; you will find your mother well and happy."
This companionship comforted him; his sad presentiments were turned into joyous ones.
Seated on the bow, beside the aged peasant, who was smoking his pipe, beneath the beautiful starry heaven, in the midst of a group of singing peasants, he imagined to himself in his own mind a hundred times his arrival at Buenos Ayres; he saw himself in a certain street; he found the shop, he flew to his cousin.
"How is my mother?
Come, let us go at once!
Let us go at once!"
They hurried on together; they ascended a staircase; a door opened.
And here his mute soliloquy came to an end; his imagination was swallowed up in a feeling of inexpressible tenderness, which made him secretly pull forth a little medal that he wore on his neck, and murmur his prayers as he kissed it.
On the twenty-seventh day after their departure they arrived.
It was a beautiful, rosy May morning, when the steamer cast anchor in the immense river of the Plata, near the shore along which stretches the vast city of Buenos Ayres, the capital of the Argentine Republic.
This splendid weather seemed to him to be a good augury.
He was beside himself with joy and impatience.
His mother was only a few miles from him!
In a few hours more he would have seen her!
He was in America, in the new world, and he had had the daring to come alone!
The whole of that extremely long voyage now seemed to him to have passed in an instant.
It seemed to him that he had flown hither in a dream, and that he had that moment waked.
And he was so happy, that he hardly experienced any surprise or distress when he felt in his pockets and found only one of the two little heaps into which he had divided his little treasure, in order to be the more sure of not losing the whole of it.
He had been robbed; he had only a few lire left; but what mattered that to him, when he was near his mother?
With his bag in his hand, he descended, in company with many other Italians, to the tug-boat which carried him within a short distance of the shore; clambered down from the tug into a boat which bore the name of Andrea Doria; was landed on the wharf; saluted his old Lombard friend, and directed his course, in long strides, towards the city.
On arriving at the entrance of the first street, he stopped a man who was passing by, and begged him to show him in what direction he should go in order to reach the street of los Artes.
He chanced to have stopped an Italian workingman.
The latter surveyed him with curiosity, and inquired if he knew how to read.
The lad nodded, "Yes."
"Well, then," said the laborer, pointing to the street from which he had just emerged, "keep straight on through there, reading the names of all the streets on the corners; you will end by finding the one you want."
The boy thanked him, and turned into the street which opened before him.
It was a straight and endless but narrow street, bordered by low white houses, which looked like so many little villas, filled with people, with carriages, with carts which made a deafening noise; here and there floated enormous banners of various hues, with announcements as to the departure of steamers for strange cities inscribed upon them in large letters.
At every little distance along the street, on the right and left, he perceived two other streets which ran straight away as far as he could see, also bordered by low white houses, filled with people and vehicles, and bounded at their extremity by the level line of the measureless plains of America, like the horizon at sea.
The city seemed infinite to him; it seemed to him that he might wander for days or weeks, seeing other streets like these, on one hand and on the other, and that all America must be covered with them.
He looked attentively at the names of the streets: strange names which cost him an effort to read.
At every fresh street, he felt his heart beat, at the thought that it was the one he was in search of.
He stared at all the women, with the thought that he might meet his mother.
He caught sight of one in front of him who made his blood leap; he overtook her: she was a negro.
And accelerating his pace, he walked on and on.
On arriving at the cross-street, he read, and stood as though rooted to the sidewalk.
It was the street del los Artes.
He turned into it, and saw the number 117; his cousin's shop was No.
175.
He quickened his pace still more, and almost ran; at No.
171 he had to pause to regain his breath.
And he said to himself, "O my mother!
my mother!
It is really true that I shall see you in another moment!"
He ran on; he arrived at a little haberdasher's shop.
This was it.
He stepped up close to it.
He saw a woman with gray hair and spectacles.
"What do you want, boy?"
she asked him in Spanish.
"Is not this," said the boy, making an effort to utter a sound, "the shop of Francesco Merelli?"
"Francesco Merelli is dead," replied the woman in Italian.
The boy felt as though he had received a blow on his breast.
"When did he die?"
"Eh?
quite a while ago," replied the woman.
"Months ago.
His affairs were in a bad state, and he ran away.
They say he went to Bahia Blanca, very far from here.
And he died just after he reached there.
The shop is mine."
The boy turned pale.
Then he said quickly, "Merelli knew my mother; my mother who was at service with Signor Mequinez.
He alone could tell me where she is.
I have come to America to find my mother.
Merelli sent her our letters.
I must find my mother."
"Poor boy!"
said the woman; "I don't know.
I can ask the boy in the courtyard.
He knew the young man who did Merelli's errands.
He may be able to tell us something."
She went to the end of the shop and called the lad, who came instantly.
"Tell me," asked the shopwoman, "do you remember whether Merelli's young man went occasionally to carry letters to a woman in service, in the house of the son of the country ?"
"To Signor Mequinez," replied the lad; "yes, signora, sometimes he did.
At the end of the street del los Artes."
"Ah!
thanks, signora!"
cried Marco.
"Tell me the number; don't you know it?
Send some one with me; come with me instantly, my boy; I have still a few soldi."
And he said this with so much warmth, that without waiting for the woman to request him, the boy replied, "Come," and at once set out at a rapid pace.
They proceeded almost at a run, without uttering a word, to the end of the extremely long street, made their way into the entrance of a little white house, and halted in front of a handsome iron gate, through which they could see a small yard, filled with vases of flowers.
Marco gave a tug at the bell.
A young lady made her appearance.
"The Mequinez family lives here, does it not?"
demanded the lad anxiously.
"They did live here," replied the young lady, pronouncing her Italian in Spanish fashion.
"Now we, the Zeballos, live here."
"And where have the Mequinez gone?"
asked Marco, his heart palpitating.
"They have gone to Cordova."
"Cordova!"
exclaimed Marco.
"Where is Cordova?
And the person whom they had in their service?
The woman, my mother!
Their servant was my mother!
Have they taken my mother away, too?"
The young lady looked at him and said: "I do not know.
Perhaps my father may know, for he knew them when they went away.
Wait a moment."
She ran away, and soon returned with her father, a tall gentleman, with a gray beard.
He looked intently for a minute at this sympathetic type of a little Genoese sailor, with his golden hair and his aquiline nose, and asked him in broken Italian, "Is your mother a Genoese?"
Marco replied that she was.
"Well then, the Genoese maid went with them; that I know for certain."
"And where have they gone?"
"To Cordova, a city."
The boy gave vent to a sigh; then he said with resignation, "Then I will go to Cordova."
"Ah, poor child!"
exclaimed the gentleman in Spanish; "poor boy!
Cordova is hundreds of miles from here."
Marco turned as white as a corpse, and clung with one hand to the railings.
"Let us see, let us see," said the gentleman, moved to pity, and opening the door; "come inside a moment; let us see if anything can be done."
He sat down, gave the boy a seat, and made him tell his story, listened to it very attentively, meditated a little, then said resolutely, "You have no money, have you?"
"I still have some, a little," answered Marco.
The gentleman reflected for five minutes more; then seated himself at a desk, wrote a letter, sealed it, and handing it to the boy, he said to him:-
"Listen to me, little Italian.
Take this letter to Boca.
That is a little city which is half Genoese, and lies two hours' journey from here.
Any one will be able to show you the road.
Go there and find the gentleman to whom this letter is addressed, and whom every one knows.
Carry the letter to him.
He will send you off to the town of Rosario to-morrow, and will recommend you to some one there, who will think out a way of enabling you to pursue your journey to Cordova, where you will find the Mequinez family and your mother.
In the meanwhile, take this."
And he placed in his hand a few lire.
"Go, and keep up your courage; you will find fellow-countrymen of yours in every direction, and you will not be deserted.
Adios! "
The boy said, "Thanks," without finding any other words to express himself, went out with his bag, and having taken leave of his little guide, he set out slowly in the direction of Boca, filled with sorrow and amazement, across that great and noisy town.
Everything that happened to him from that moment until the evening of that day ever afterwards lingered in his memory in a confused and uncertain form, like the wild vagaries of a person in a fever, so weary was he, so troubled, so despondent.
And at nightfall on the following day, after having slept over night in a poor little chamber in a house in Boca, beside a harbor porter, after having passed nearly the whole of that day seated on a pile of beams, and, as in delirium, in sight of thousands of ships and boats and tugs, he found himself on the poop of a large sailing vessel, loaded with fruit, which was setting out for the town of Rosario, managed by three robust Genoese, who were bronzed by the sun; and their voices and the dialect which they spoke put a little comfort into his heart once more.
They set out, and the voyage lasted three days and four nights, and it was a continual amazement to the little traveller.
Three days and four nights on that wonderful river Paran, in comparison with which our great Po is but a rivulet; and the length of Italy quadrupled does not equal that of its course.
The barge advanced slowly against this immeasurable mass of water.
It threaded its way among long islands, once the haunts of serpents and tigers, covered with orange-trees and willows, like floating coppices; now they passed through narrow canals, from which it seemed as though they could never issue forth; now they sailed out on vast expanses of water, having the aspect of great tranquil lakes; then among islands again, through the intricate channels of an archipelago, amid enormous masses of vegetation.
A profound silence reigned.
For long stretches the shores and very vast and solitary waters produced the impression of an unknown stream, upon which this poor little sail was the first in all the world to venture itself.
The further they advanced, the more this monstrous river dismayed him.
He imagined that his mother was at its source, and that their navigation must last for years.
Twice a day he ate a little bread and salted meat with the boatmen, who, perceiving that he was sad, never addressed a word to him.
At night he slept on deck and woke every little while with a start, astounded by the limpid light of the moon, which silvered the immense expanse of water and the distant shores; and then his heart sank within him.
"Cordova!"
He repeated that name, "Cordova!"
like the name of one of those mysterious cities of which he had heard in fables.
But then he thought, "My mother passed this spot; she saw these islands, these shores;" and then these places upon which the glance of his mother had fallen no longer seemed strange and solitary to him.
At night one of the boatmen sang.
That voice reminded him of his mother's songs, when she had lulled him to sleep as a little child.
On the last night, when he heard that song, he sobbed.
The boatman interrupted his song.
Then he cried, "Courage, courage, my son!
What the deuce!
A Genoese crying because he is far from home!
The Genoese make the circuit of the world, glorious and triumphant!"
And at these words he shook himself, he heard the voice of the Genoese blood, and he raised his head aloft with pride, dashing his fist down on the rudder.
"Well, yes," he said to himself; "and if I am also obliged to travel for years and years to come, all over the world, and to traverse hundreds of miles on foot, I will go on until I find my mother, were I to arrive in a dying condition, and fall dead at her feet!
If only I can see her once again!
Courage!"
And with this frame of mind he arrived at daybreak, on a cool and rosy morning, in front of the city of Rosario, situated on the high bank of the Paran, where the beflagged yards of a hundred vessels of every land were mirrored in the waves.
Shortly after landing, he went to the town, bag in hand, to seek an Argentine gentleman for whom his protector in Boca had intrusted him with a visiting-card, with a few words of recommendation.
On entering Rosario, it seemed to him that he was coming into a city with which he was already familiar.
There were the straight, interminable streets, bordered with low white houses, traversed in all directions above the roofs by great bundles of telegraph and telephone wires, which looked like enormous spiders' webs; and a great confusion of people, of horses, and of vehicles.
His head grew confused; he almost thought that he had got back to Buenos Ayres, and must hunt up his cousin once more.
He wandered about for nearly an hour, making one turn after another, and seeming always to come back to the same street; and by dint of inquiring, he found the house of his new protector.
He pulled the bell.
There came to the door a big, light-haired, gruff man, who had the air of a steward, and who demanded awkwardly, with a foreign accent:-
"What do you want?"
The boy mentioned the name of his patron.
"The master has gone away," replied the steward; "he set out yesterday afternoon for Buenos Ayres, with his whole family."
The boy was left speechless.
Then he stammered, "But I-I have no one here!
I am alone!"
and he offered the card.
The steward took it, read it, and said surlily: "I don't know what to do for you.
I'll give it to him when he returns a month hence."
"But I, I am alone; I am in need!"
exclaimed the lad, in a supplicating voice.
"Eh?
come now," said the other; "just as though there were not a plenty of your sort from your country in Rosario!
Be off, and do your begging in Italy!"
And he slammed the door in his face.
The boy stood there as though he had been turned to stone.
Then he picked up his bag again slowly, and went out, his heart torn with anguish, with his mind in a whirl, assailed all at once by a thousand anxious thoughts.
What was to be done?
Where was he to go?
From Rosario to Cordova was a day's journey, by rail.
He had only a few lire left.
After deducting what he should be obliged to spend that day, he would have next to nothing left.
Where was he to find the money to pay his fare?
He could work-but how?
To whom should he apply for work?
Ask alms?
Ah, no!
To be repulsed, insulted, humiliated, as he had been a little while ago?
No; never, never more-rather would he die!
And at this idea, and at the sight of the very long street which was lost in the distance of the boundless plain, he felt his courage desert him once more, flung his bag on the sidewalk, sat down with his back against the wall, and bent his head between his hands, in an attitude of despair.
People jostled him with their feet as they passed; the vehicles filled the road with noise; several boys stopped to look at him.
He remained thus for a while.
Then he was startled by a voice saying to him in a mixture of Italian and Lombard dialect, "What is the matter, little boy?"
He raised his face at these words, and instantly sprang to his feet, uttering an exclamation of wonder: "You here!"
It was the old Lombard peasant with whom he had struck up a friendship during the voyage.
The amazement of the peasant was no less than his own; but the boy did not leave him time to question him, and he rapidly recounted the state of his affairs.
"Now I am without a soldo.
I must go to work.
Find me work, that I may get together a few lire.
I will do anything; I will carry rubbish, I will sweep the streets; I can run on errands, or even work in the country; I am content to live on black bread; but only let it be so that I may set out quickly, that I may find my mother once more.
Do me this charity, and find me work, find me work, for the love of God, for I can do no more!"
"The deuce!
the deuce!"
said the peasant, looking about him, and scratching his chin.
"What a story is this!
To work, to work!-that is soon said.
Let us look about a little.
Is there no way of finding thirty lire among so many fellow-countrymen?"
The boy looked at him, consoled by a ray of hope.
"Come with me," said the peasant.
"Where?"
asked the lad, gathering up his bag again.
"Come with me."
The peasant started on; Marco followed him.
They traversed a long stretch of street together without speaking.
The peasant halted at the door of an inn which had for its sign a star, and an inscription beneath, The Star of Italy.
He thrust his face in, and turning to the boy, he said cheerfully, "We have arrived at just the right moment."
They entered a large room, where there were numerous tables, and many men seated, drinking and talking loudly.
The old Lombard approached the first table, and from the manner in which he saluted the six guests who were gathered around it, it was evident that he had been in their company until a short time previously.
They were red in the face, and were clinking their glasses, and vociferating and laughing.
"Comrades," said the Lombard, without any preface, remaining on his feet, and presenting Marco, "here is a poor lad, our fellow-countryman, who has come alone from Genoa to Buenos Ayres to seek his mother.
At Buenos Ayres they told him, 'She is not here; she is in Cordova.'
He came in a bark to Rosario, three days and three nights on the way, with a couple of lines of recommendation.
He presents the card; they make an ugly face at him: he hasn't a centesimo to bless himself with.
He is here alone and in despair.
He is a lad full of heart.
Let us see a bit.
Can't we find enough to pay for his ticket to go to Cordova in search of his mother?
Are we to leave him here like a dog?"
"Never in the world, by Heavens!
That shall never be said!"
they all shouted at once, hammering on the table with their fists.
"A fellow-countryman of ours!
Come hither, little fellow!
We are emigrants!
See what a handsome young rogue!
Out with your coppers, comrades!
Bravo!
Come alone!
He has daring!
Drink a sup, patriotta !
We'll send you to your mother; never fear!"
And one pinched his cheek, another slapped him on the shoulder, a third relieved him of his bag; other emigrants rose from the neighboring tables, and gathered about; the boy's story made the round of the inn; three Argentine guests hurried in from the adjoining room; and in less than ten minutes the Lombard peasant, who was passing round the hat, had collected forty-two lire.
"Do you see," he then said, turning to the boy, "how fast things are done in America?"
"Drink!"
cried another to him, offering him a glass of wine; "to the health of your mother!"
All raised their glasses, and Marco repeated, "To the health of my-" But a sob of joy choked him, and, setting the glass on the table, he flung himself on the old man's neck.
At daybreak on the following morning he set out for Cordova, ardent and smiling, filled with presentiments of happiness.
But there is no cheerfulness that rules for long in the face of certain sinister aspects of nature.
The weather was close and dull; the train, which was nearly empty, ran through an immense plain, destitute of every sign of habitation.
He found himself alone in a very long car, which resembled those on trains for the wounded.
He gazed to the right, he gazed to the left, and he saw nothing but an endless solitude, strewn with tiny, deformed trees, with contorted trunks and branches, in attitudes such as were never seen before, almost of wrath and anguish, and a sparse and melancholy vegetation, which gave to the plain the aspect of a ruined cemetery.
He dozed for half an hour; then resumed his survey: the spectacle was still the same.
The railway stations were deserted, like the dwellings of hermits; and when the train stopped, not a sound was heard; it seemed to him that he was alone in a lost train, abandoned in the middle of a desert.
It seemed to him as though each station must be the last, and that he should then enter the mysterious regions of the savages.
An icy breeze nipped his face.
On embarking at Genoa, towards the end of April, it had not occurred to him that he should find winter in America, and he was dressed for summer.
After several hours of this he began to suffer from cold, and in connection with the cold, from the fatigue of the days he had recently passed through, filled as they had been with violent emotions, and from sleepless and harassing nights.
He fell asleep, slept a long time, and awoke benumbed; he felt ill. Then a vague terror of falling ill, of dying on the journey, seized upon him; a fear of being thrown out there, in the middle of that desolate prairie, where his body would be torn in pieces by dogs and birds of prey, like the corpses of horses and cows which he had caught sight of every now and then beside the track, and from which he had turned aside his eyes in disgust.
In this state of anxious illness, in the midst of that dark silence of nature, his imagination grew excited, and looked on the dark side of things.
Was he quite sure, after all, that he should find his mother at Cordova?
And what if she had not gone there?
What if that gentleman in the Via del los Artes had made a mistake?
And what if she were dead?
Thus meditating, he fell asleep again, and dreamed that he was in Cordova, and it was night, and that he heard cries from all the doors and all the windows: "She is not here!
She is not here!
She is not here!"
This roused him with a start, in terror, and he saw at the other end of the car three bearded men enveloped in shawls of various colors who were staring at him and talking together in a low tone; and the suspicion flashed across him that they were assassins, and that they wanted to kill him for the sake of stealing his bag.
Fear was added to his consciousness of illness and to the cold; his fancy, already perturbed, became distorted: the three men kept on staring at him; one of them moved towards him; then his reason wandered, and rushing towards him with arms wide open, he shrieked, "I have nothing; I am a poor boy; I have come from Italy; I am in quest of my mother; I am alone: do not do me any harm!"
They instantly understood the situation; they took compassion on him, caressed and soothed him, speaking to him many words which he did not hear nor comprehend; and perceiving that his teeth were chattering with cold, they wrapped one of their shawls around him, and made him sit down again, so that he might go to sleep.
And he did fall asleep once more, when the twilight was descending.
When they aroused him, he was at Cordova.
Ah, what a deep breath he drew, and with what impetuosity he flew from the car!
He inquired of one of the station employees where the house of the engineer Mequinez was situated; the latter mentioned the name of a church; it stood beside the church: the boy hastened away.
It was night.
He entered the city, and it seemed to him that he was entering Rosario once more; that he again beheld those straight streets, flanked with little white houses, and intersected by other very long and straight streets.
But there were very few people, and under the light of the rare street lanterns, he encountered strange faces of a hue unknown to him, between black and greenish; and raising his head from time to time, he beheld churches of bizarre architecture which were outlined black and vast against the sky.
The city was dark and silent, but after having traversed that immense desert, it appeared lively to him.
He inquired his way of a priest, speedily found the church and the house, pulled the bell with one trembling hand, and pressed the other on his breast to repress the beating of his heart, which was leaping into his throat.
An old woman, with a light in her hand, opened the door.
The boy could not speak at once.
"Whom do you want?"
demanded the dame in Spanish.
"The engineer Mequinez," replied Marco.
The old woman made a motion to cross her arms on her breast, and replied, with a shake of the head: "So you, too, have dealings with the engineer Mequinez!
It strikes me that it is time to stop this.
We have been worried for the last three months.
It is not enough that the newspapers have said it.
We shall have to have it printed on the corner of the street, that Signor Mequinez has gone to live at Tucuman!"
The boy gave way to a gesture of despair.
Then he gave way to an outburst of passion.
"So there is a curse upon me!
I am doomed to die on the road, without having found my mother!
I shall go mad!
I shall kill myself!
My God!
what is the name of that country?
Where is it?
At what distance is it situated?"
"Eh, poor boy," replied the old woman, moved to pity; "a mere trifle!
We are four or five hundred miles from there, at least."
The boy covered his face with his hands; then he asked with a sob, "And now what am I to do!"
"What am I to say to you, my poor child?"
responded the dame: "I don't know."
But suddenly an idea struck her, and she added hastily: "Listen, now that I think of it.
There is one thing that you can do.
Go down this street, to the right, and at the third house you will find a courtyard; there there is a capataz, a trader, who is setting out to-morrow for Tucuman, with his wagons and his oxen.
Go and see if he will take you, and offer him your services; perhaps he will give you a place on his wagons: go at once."
The lad grasped his bag, thanked her as he ran, and two minutes later found himself in a vast courtyard, lighted by lanterns, where a number of men were engaged in loading sacks of grain on certain enormous carts which resembled the movable houses of mountebanks, with rounded tops, and very tall wheels; and a tall man with mustaches, enveloped in a sort of mantle of black and white check, and with big boots, was directing the work.
The lad approached this man, and timidly proffered his request, saying that he had come from Italy, and that he was in search of his mother.
The capataz, which signifies the head (the head conductor of this convoy of wagons), surveyed him from head to foot with a keen glance, and replied drily, "I have no place."
"I have fifteen lire," answered the boy in a supplicating tone; "I will give you my fifteen lire.
I will work on the journey; I will fetch the water and fodder for the animals; I will perform all sorts of services.
A little bread will suffice for me.
Make a little place for me, signor."
The capataz looked him over again, and replied with a better grace, "There is no room; and then, we are not going to Tucuman; we are going to another town, Santiago dell'Estero.
We shall have to leave you at a certain point, and you will still have a long way to go on foot."
"Ah, I will make twice as long a journey!"
exclaimed Marco; "I can walk; do not worry about that; I shall get there by some means or other: make a little room for me, signor, out of charity; for pity's sake, do not leave me here alone!"
"Beware; it is a journey of twenty days."
"It matters nothing to me."
"It is a hard journey."
"I will endure everything."
"You will have to travel alone."
"I fear nothing, if I can only find my mother.
Have compassion!"
The capataz drew his face close to a lantern, and scrutinized him.
Then he said, "Very well."
The lad kissed his hand.
"You shall sleep in one of the wagons to-night," added the capataz, as he quitted him; "to-morrow morning, at four o'clock, I will wake you.
Good night."
At four o'clock in the morning, by the light of the stars, the long string of wagons was set in motion with a great noise; each cart was drawn by six oxen, and all were followed by a great number of spare animals for a change.
The boy, who had been awakened and placed in one of the carts, on the sacks, instantly fell again into a deep sleep.
When he awoke, the convoy had halted in a solitary spot, full in the sun, and all the men-the peones -were seated round a quarter of calf, which was roasting in the open air, beside a large fire, which was flickering in the wind.
They all ate together, took a nap, and then set out again; and thus the journey continued, regulated like a march of soldiers.
Every morning they set out on the road at five o'clock, halted at nine, set out again at five o'clock in the evening, and halted again at ten.
The peones rode on horseback, and stimulated the oxen with long goads.
The boy lighted the fire for the roasting, gave the beasts their fodder, polished up the lanterns, and brought water for drinking.
The landscape passed before him like an indistinct vision: vast groves of little brown trees; villages consisting of a few scattered houses, with red and battlemented fa&#231;ades; very vast tracts, possibly the ancient beds of great salt lakes, which gleamed white with salt as far as the eye could reach; and on every hand, and always, the prairie, solitude, silence.
On very rare occasions they encountered two or three travellers on horseback, followed by a herd of picked horses, who passed them at a gallop, like a whirlwind.
The days were all alike, as at sea, wearisome and interminable; but the weather was fine.
But the peones became more and more exacting every day, as though the lad were their bond slave; some of them treated him brutally, with threats; all forced him to serve them without mercy: they made him carry enormous bundles of forage; they sent him to get water at great distances; and he, broken with fatigue, could not even sleep at night, continually tossed about as he was by the violent jolts of the wagon, and the deafening groaning of the wheels and wooden axles.
And in addition to this, the wind having risen, a fine, reddish, greasy dust, which enveloped everything, penetrated the wagon, made its way under the covers, filled his eyes and mouth, robbed him of sight and breath, constantly, oppressively, insupportably.
Worn out with toil and lack of sleep, reduced to rags and dirt, reproached and ill treated from morning till night, the poor boy grew every day more dejected, and would have lost heart entirely if the capataz had not addressed a kind word to him now and then.
He often wept, unseen, in a corner of the wagon, with his face against his bag, which no longer contained anything but rags.
Every morning he rose weaker and more discouraged, and as he looked out over the country, and beheld always the same boundless and implacable plain, like a terrestrial ocean, he said to himself: "Ah, I shall not hold out until to-night!
I shall not hold out until to-night!
To-day I shall die on the road!"
And his toil increased, his ill treatment was redoubled.
One morning, in the absence of the capataz, one of the men struck him, because he had delayed in fetching the water.
And then they all began to take turns at it, when they gave him an order, dealing him a kick, saying: "Take that, you vagabond!
Carry that to your mother!"
His heart was breaking.
He fell ill; for three days he remained in the wagon, with a coverlet over him, fighting a fever, and seeing no one except the capataz, who came to give him his drink and feel his pulse.
And then he believed that he was lost, and invoked his mother in despair, calling her a hundred times by name: "O my mother!
my mother!
Help me!
Come to me, for I am dying!
Oh, my poor mother, I shall never see you again!
My poor mother, who will find me dead beside the way!"
And he folded his hands over his bosom and prayed.
Then he grew better, thanks to the care of the capataz, and recovered; but with his recovery arrived the most terrible day of his journey, the day on which he was to be left to his own devices.
They had been on the way for more than two weeks; when they arrived at the point where the road to Tucuman parted from that which leads to Santiago dell'Estero, the capataz announced to him that they must separate.
He gave him some instructions with regard to the road, tied his bag on his shoulders in a manner which would not annoy him as he walked, and, breaking off short, as though he feared that he should be affected, he bade him farewell.
The boy had barely time to kiss him on one arm.
The other men, too, who had treated him so harshly, seemed to feel a little pity at the sight of him left thus alone, and they made signs of farewell to him as they moved away.
And he returned the salute with his hand, stood watching the convoy until it was lost to sight in the red dust of the plain, and then set out sadly on his road.
One thing, on the other hand, comforted him a little from the first.
After all those days of travel across that endless plain, which was forever the same, he saw before him a chain of mountains very high and blue, with white summits, which reminded him of the Alps, and gave him the feeling of having drawn near to his own country once more.
They were the Andes, the dorsal spine of the American continent, that immense chain which extends from Tierra del Fuego to the glacial sea of the Arctic pole, through a hundred and ten degrees of latitude.
And he was also comforted by the fact that the air seemed to him to grow constantly warmer; and this happened, because, in ascending towards the north, he was slowly approaching the tropics.
At great distances apart there were tiny groups of houses with a petty shop; and he bought something to eat.
He encountered men on horseback; every now and then he saw women and children seated on the ground, motionless and grave, with faces entirely new to him, of an earthen hue, with oblique eyes and prominent cheek-bones, who looked at him intently, and accompanied him with their gaze, turning their heads slowly like automatons.
They were Indians.
The first day he walked as long as his strength would permit, and slept under a tree.
On the second day he made considerably less progress, and with less spirit.
His shoes were dilapidated, his feet wounded, his stomach weakened by bad food.
Towards evening he began to be alarmed.
He had heard, in Italy, that in this land there were serpents; he fancied that he heard them crawling; he halted, then set out on a run, and with cold chills in all his bones.
At times he was seized with a profound pity for himself, and he wept silently as he walked.
Then he thought, "Oh, how much my mother would suffer if she knew that I am afraid!"
and this thought restored his courage.
Then, in order to distract his thoughts from fear, he meditated much of her; he recalled to mind her words when she had set out from Genoa, and the movement with which she had arranged the coverlet beneath his chin when he was in bed, and when he was a baby; for every time that she took him in her arms, she said to him, "Stay here a little while with me"; and thus she remained for a long time, with her head resting on his, thinking, thinking.
And he said to himself: "Shall I see thee again, dear mother?
Shall I arrive at the end of my journey, my mother?"
And he walked on and on, among strange trees, vast plantations of sugar-cane, and fields without end, always with those blue mountains in front of him, which cut the sky with their exceedingly lofty crests.
Four days, five days-a week, passed.
His strength was rapidly declining, his feet were bleeding.
Finally, one evening at sunset, they said to him:-
"Tucuman is fifty miles from here."
He uttered a cry of joy, and hastened his steps, as though he had, in that moment, regained all his lost vigor.
But it was a brief illusion.
His forces suddenly abandoned him, and he fell upon the brink of a ditch, exhausted.
But his heart was beating with content.
The heaven, thickly sown with the most brilliant stars, had never seemed so beautiful to him.
He contemplated it, as he lay stretched out on the grass to sleep, and thought that, perhaps, at that very moment, his mother was gazing at him.
And he said:-
"O my mother, where art thou?
What art thou doing at this moment?
Dost thou think of thy son?
Dost thou think of thy Marco, who is so near to thee?"
Poor Marco!
If he could have seen in what a case his mother was at that moment, he would have made a superhuman effort to proceed on his way, and to reach her a few hours earlier.
She was ill in bed, in a ground-floor room of a lordly mansion, where dwelt the entire Mequinez family.
The latter had become very fond of her, and had helped her a great deal.
The poor woman had already been ailing when the engineer Mequinez had been obliged unexpectedly to set out far from Buenos Ayres, and she had not benefited at all by the fine air of Cordova.
But then, the fact that she had received no response to her letters from her husband, nor from her cousin, the presentiment, always lively, of some great misfortune, the continual anxiety in which she had lived, between the parting and staying, expecting every day some bad news, had caused her to grow worse out of all proportion.
Finally, a very serious malady had declared itself,-a strangled internal rupture.
She had not risen from her bed for a fortnight.
A surgical operation was necessary to save her life.
And at precisely the moment when Marco was apostrophizing her, the master and mistress of the house were standing beside her bed, arguing with her, with great gentleness, to persuade her to allow herself to be operated on, and she was persisting in her refusal, and weeping.
A good physician of Tucuman had come in vain a week before.
"No, my dear master," she said; "do not count upon it; I have not the strength to resist; I should die under the surgeon's knife.
It is better to allow me to die thus.
I no longer cling to life.
All is at an end for me.
It is better to die before learning what has happened to my family."
And her master and mistress opposed, and said that she must take courage, that she would receive a reply to the last letters, which had been sent directly to Genoa; that she must allow the operation to be performed; that it must be done for the sake of her family.
But this suggestion of her children only aggravated her profound discouragement, which had for a long time prostrated her, with increasing anguish.
At these words she burst into tears.
"O my sons!
my sons!"
she exclaimed, wringing her hands; "perhaps they are no longer alive!
It is better that I should die also.
I thank you, my good master and mistress; I thank you from my heart.
But it is better that I should die.
At all events, I am certain that I shall not be cured by this operation.
Thanks for all your care, my good master and mistress.
It is useless for the doctor to come again after to-morrow.
I wish to die.
It is my fate to die here.
I have decided."
And they began again to console her, and to repeat, "Don't say that," and to take her hand and beseech her.
But she closed her eyes then in exhaustion, and fell into a doze, so that she appeared to be dead.
And her master and mistress remained there a little while, by the faint light of a taper, watching with great compassion that admirable mother, who, for the sake of saving her family, had come to die six thousand miles from her country, to die after having toiled so hard, poor woman!
and she was so honest, so good, so unfortunate.
Early on the morning of the following day, Marco, bent and limping, with his bag on his back, entered the city of Tucuman, one of the youngest and most flourishing towns of the Argentine Republic.
It seemed to him that he beheld again Cordova, Rosario, Buenos Ayres: there were the same straight and extremely long streets, the same low white houses, but on every hand there was a new and magnificent vegetation, a perfumed air, a marvellous light, a sky limpid and profound, such as he had never seen even in Italy.
As he advanced through the streets, he experienced once more the feverish agitation which had seized on him at Buenos Ayres; he stared at the windows and doors of all the houses; he stared at all the women who passed him, with an anxious hope that he might meet his mother; he would have liked to question every one, but did not dare to stop any one.
All the people who were standing at their doors turned to gaze after the poor, tattered, dusty lad, who showed that he had come from afar.
And he was seeking, among all these people, a countenance which should inspire him with confidence, in order to direct to its owner that tremendous query, when his eyes fell upon the sign of an inn upon which was inscribed an Italian name.
Inside were a man with spectacles, and two women.
He approached the door slowly, and summoning up a resolute spirit, he inquired:-
"Can you tell me, signor, where the family Mequinez is?"
"The engineer Mequinez?"
asked the innkeeper in his turn.
"The engineer Mequinez," replied the lad in a thread of a voice.
"The Mequinez family is not in Tucuman," replied the innkeeper.
A cry of desperate pain, like that of one who has been stabbed, formed an echo to these words.
The innkeeper and the women rose, and some neighbors ran up.
"What's the matter?
what ails you, my boy?"
said the innkeeper, drawing him into the shop and making him sit down.
"The deuce!
there's no reason for despairing!
The Mequinez family is not here, but at a little distance off, a few hours from Tucuman."
"Where?
where?"
shrieked Marco, springing up like one restored to life.
"Fifteen miles from here," continued the man, "on the river, at Saladillo, in a place where a big sugar factory is being built, and a cluster of houses; Signor Mequinez's house is there; every one knows it: you can reach it in a few hours."
"I was there a month ago," said a youth, who had hastened up at the cry.
Marco stared at him with wide-open eyes, and asked him hastily, turning pale as he did so, "Did you see the servant of Signor Mequinez-the Italian?"
"The Genoese?
Yes; I saw her."
Marco burst into a convulsive sob, which was half a laugh and half a sob.
Then, with a burst of violent resolution: "Which way am I to go?
quick, the road!
I shall set out instantly; show me the way!"
"But it is a day's march," they all told him, in one breath.
"You are weary; you should rest; you can set out to-morrow."
"Impossible!
impossible!"
replied the lad.
"Tell me the way; I will not wait another instant; I shall set out at once, were I to die on the road!"
On perceiving him so inflexible, they no longer opposed him.
"May God accompany you!"
they said to him.
"Look out for the path through the forest.
A fair journey to you, little Italian!"
A man accompanied him outside of the town, pointed out to him the road, gave him some counsel, and stood still to watch him start.
At the expiration of a few minutes, the lad disappeared, limping, with his bag on his shoulders, behind the thick trees which lined the road.
That night was a dreadful one for the poor sick woman.
She suffered atrocious pain, which wrung from her shrieks that were enough to burst her veins, and rendered her delirious at times.
The women waited on her.
She lost her head.
Her mistress ran in, from time to time, in affright.
All began to fear that, even if she had decided to allow herself to be operated on, the doctor, who was not to come until the next day, would have arrived too late.
During the moments when she was not raving, however, it was evident that her most terrible torture arose not from her bodily pains, but from the thought of her distant family.
Emaciated, wasted away, with changed visage, she thrust her hands through her hair, with a gesture of desperation, and shrieked:-
"My God!
My God!
To die so far away, to die without seeing them again!
My poor children, who will be left without a mother, my poor little creatures, my poor darlings!
My Marco, who is still so small!
only as tall as this, and so good and affectionate!
You do not know what a boy he was!
If you only knew, signora!
I could not detach him from my neck when I set out; he sobbed in a way to move your pity; he sobbed; it seemed as though he knew that he would never behold his poor mother again.
Poor Marco, my poor baby!
I thought that my heart would break!
Ah, if I had only died then, died while they were bidding me farewell!
If I had but dropped dead!
Without a mother, my poor child, he who loved me so dearly, who needed me so much!
without a mother, in misery, he will be forced to beg!
He, Marco, my Marco, will stretch out his hand, famishing!
O eternal God!
No!
I will not die!
The doctor!
Call him at once I let him come, let him cut me, let him cleave my breast, let him drive me mad; but let him save my life!
I want to recover; I want to live, to depart, to flee, to-morrow, at once!
The doctor!
Help!
help!"
And the women seized her hands and soothed her, and made her calm herself little by little, and spoke to her of God and of hope.
And then she fell back again into a mortal dejection, wept with her hands clutched in her gray hair, moaned like an infant, uttering a prolonged lament, and murmuring from time to time:-
"O my Genoa!
My house!
All that sea!-O my Marco, my poor Marco!
Where is he now, my poor darling?"
It was midnight; and her poor Marco, after having passed many hours on the brink of a ditch, his strength exhausted, was then walking through a forest of gigantic trees, monsters of vegetation, huge boles like the pillars of a cathedral, which interlaced their enormous crests, silvered by the moon, at a wonderful height.
Vaguely, amid the half gloom, he caught glimpses of myriads of trunks of all forms, upright, inclined, contorted, crossed in strange postures of menace and of conflict; some overthrown on the earth, like towers which had fallen bodily, and covered with a dense and confused mass of vegetation, which seemed like a furious throng, disputing the ground span by span; others collected in great groups, vertical and serrated, like trophies of titanic lances, whose tips touched the clouds; a superb grandeur, a prodigious disorder of colossal forms, the most majestically terrible spectacle which vegetable nature ever presented.
At times he was overwhelmed by a great stupor.
But his mind instantly took flight again towards his mother.
He was worn out, with bleeding feet, alone in the middle of this formidable forest, where it was only at long intervals that he saw tiny human habitations, which at the foot of these trees seemed like the ant-hills, or some buffalo asleep beside the road; he was exhausted, but he was not conscious of his exhaustion; he was alone, and he felt no fear.
The grandeur of the forest rendered his soul grand; his nearness to his mother gave him the strength and the hardihood of a man; the memory of the ocean, of the alarms and the sufferings which he had undergone and vanquished, of the toil which he had endured, of the iron constancy which he had displayed, caused him to uplift his brow.
All his strong and noble Genoese blood flowed back to his heart in an ardent tide of joy and audacity.
And a new thing took place within him; while he had, up to this time, borne in his mind an image of his mother, dimmed and paled somewhat by the two years of absence, at that moment the image grew clear; he again beheld her face, perfect and distinct, as he had not beheld it for a long time; he beheld it close to him, illuminated, speaking; he again beheld the most fleeting motions of her eyes, and of her lips, all her attitudes, all the shades of her thoughts; and urged on by these pursuing recollections, he hastened his steps; and a new affection, an unspeakable tenderness, grew in him, grew in his heart, making sweet and quiet tears to flow down his face; and as he advanced through the gloom, he spoke to her, he said to her the words which he would murmur in her ear in a little while more:-
"I am here, my mother; behold me here.
I will never leave you again; we will return home together, and I will remain always beside you on board the ship, close beside you, and no one shall ever part me from you again, no one, never more, so long as I have life!"
And in the meantime he did not observe how the silvery light of the moon was dying away on the summits of the gigantic trees in the delicate whiteness of the dawn.
At eight o'clock on that morning, the doctor from Tucuman, a young Argentine, was already by the bedside of the sick woman, in company with an assistant, endeavoring, for the last time, to persuade her to permit herself to be operated on; and the engineer Mequinez and his wife added their warmest persuasions to those of the former.
But all was in vain.
The woman, feeling her strength exhausted, had no longer any faith in the operation; she was perfectly certain that she should die under it, or that she should only survive it a few hours, after having suffered in vain pains that were more atrocious than those of which she should die in any case.
The doctor lingered to tell her once more:-
"But the operation is a safe one; your safety is certain, provided you exercise a little courage!
And your death is equally certain if you refuse!"
It was a sheer waste of words.
"No," she replied in a faint voice, "I still have courage to die; but I no longer have any to suffer uselessly.
Leave me to die in peace."
The doctor desisted in discouragement.
No one said anything more.
Then the woman turned her face towards her mistress, and addressed to her her last prayers in a dying voice.
"Dear, good signora," she said with a great effort, sobbing, "you will send this little money and my poor effects to my family-through the consul.
I hope that they may all be alive.
My heart presages well in these, my last moments.
You will do me the favor to write-that I have always thought of them, that I have always toiled for them-for my children-that my sole grief was not to see them once more-but that I died courageously-with resignation-blessing them; and that I recommend to my husband-and to my elder son-the youngest, my poor Marco-that I bore him in my heart until the last moment-" And suddenly she became excited, and shrieked, as she clasped her hands: "My Marco, my baby, my baby!
My life!-" But on casting her tearful eyes round her, she perceived that her mistress was no longer there; she had been secretly called away.
She sought her master; he had disappeared.
No one remained with her except the two nurses and the assistant.
She heard in the adjoining room the sound of hurried footsteps, a murmur of hasty and subdued voices, and repressed exclamations.
The sick woman fixed her glazing eyes on the door, in expectation.
At the end of a few minutes she saw the doctor appear with an unusual expression on his face; then her mistress and master, with their countenances also altered.
All three gazed at her with a singular expression, and exchanged a few words in a low tone.
She fancied that the doctor said to her mistress, "Better let it be at once."
She did not understand.
"Josefa," said her mistress to the sick woman, in a trembling voice, "I have some good news for you.
Prepare your heart for good news."
The woman observed her intently.
"News," pursued the lady, with increasing agitation, "which will give you great joy."
The sick woman's eyes dilated.
"Prepare yourself," continued her mistress, "to see a person-of whom you are very fond."
The woman raised her head with a vigorous movement, and began to gaze in rapid succession, first at the lady and then at the door, with flashing eyes.
"A person," added the lady, turning pale, "who has just arrived-unexpectedly."
"Who is it?"
shrieked the woman, with a strange and choked voice, like that of a person in terror.
An instant later she gave vent to a shrill scream, sprang into a sitting posture in her bed, and remained motionless, with starting eyes, and her hands pressed to her temples, as in the presence of a supernatural apparition.
Marco, tattered and dusty, stood there on the threshold, held back by the doctor's hand on one arm.
The woman uttered three shrieks: "God!
God!
My God!"
Marco rushed forward; she stretched out to him her fleshless arms, and straining him to her heart with the strength of a tiger, she burst into a violent laugh, broken by deep, tearless sobs, which caused her to fall back suffocating on her pillow.
But she speedily recovered herself, and mad with joy, she shrieked as she covered his head with kisses: "How do you come here?
Why?
Is it you?
How you have grown!
Who brought you?
Are you alone?
You are not ill?
It is you, Marco!
It is not a dream!
My God!
Speak to me!"
Then she suddenly changed her tone: "No!
Be silent!
Wait!"
And turning to the doctor, she said with precipitation: "Quick, doctor!
this instant!
I want to get well.
I am ready.
Do not lose a moment.
Take Marco away, so that he may not hear.-Marco, my love, it is nothing.
I will tell you about it.
One more kiss.
Go!-Here I am, doctor."
Marco was taken away.
The master, mistress, and women retired in haste; the surgeon and his assistant remained behind, and closed the door.
Signor Mequinez attempted to lead Marco to a distant room, but it was impossible; he seemed rooted to the pavement.
"What is it?"
he asked.
"What is the matter with my mother?
What are they doing to her?"
And then Mequinez said softly, still trying to draw him away: "Here!
Listen to me.
I will tell you now.
Your mother is ill; she must undergo a little operation; I will explain it all to you: come with me."
"No," replied the lad, resisting; "I want to stay here.
Explain it to me here."
The engineer heaped words on words, as he drew him away; the boy began to grow terrified and to tremble.
Suddenly an acute cry, like that of one wounded to the death, rang through the whole house.
The boy responded with another desperate shriek, "My mother is dead!"
The doctor appeared on the threshold and said, "Your mother is saved."
The boy gazed at him for a moment, and then flung himself at his feet, sobbing, "Thanks, doctor!"
But the doctor raised him with a gesture, saying: "Rise!
It is you, you heroic child, who have saved your mother!"
Wednesday, 24th.
Marco, the Genoese, is the last little hero but one whose acquaintance we shall make this year; only one remains for the month of June.
There are only two more monthly examinations, twenty-six days of lessons, six Thursdays, and five Sundays.
The air of the end of the year is already perceptible.
The trees of the garden, leafy and in blossom, cast a fine shade on the gymnastic apparatus.
The scholars are already dressed in summer clothes.
And it is beautiful, at the close of school and the exit of the classes, to see how different everything is from what it was in the months that are past.
The long locks which touched the shoulders have disappeared; all heads are closely shorn; bare legs and throats are to be seen; little straw hats of every shape, with ribbons that descend even on the backs of the wearers; shirts and neckties of every hue; all the little children with something red or blue about them, a facing, a border, a tassel, a scrap of some vivid color tacked on somewhere by the mother, so that even the poorest may make a good figure; and many come to school without any hats, as though they had run away from home.
Some wear the white gymnasium suit.
There is one of Schoolmistress Delcati's boys who is red from head to foot, like a boiled crab.
Several are dressed like sailors.
But the finest of all is the little mason, who has donned a big straw hat, which gives him the appearance of a half-candle with a shade over it; and it is ridiculous to see him make his hare's face beneath it.
Coretti, too, has abandoned his catskin cap, and wears an old travelling-cap of gray silk.
Votini has a sort of Scotch dress, all decorated; Crossi displays his bare breast; Precossi is lost inside of a blue blouse belonging to the blacksmith-ironmonger.
And Garoffi?
Now that he has been obliged to discard the cloak beneath which he concealed his wares, all his pockets are visible, bulging with all sorts of huckster's trifles, and the lists of his lotteries force themselves out.
Now all his pockets allow their contents to be seen,-fans made of half a newspaper, knobs of canes, darts to fire at birds, herbs, and maybugs which creep out of his pockets and crawl gradually over the jackets.
Many of the little fellows carry bunches of flowers to the mistresses.
The mistresses are dressed in summer garments also, of cheerful tints; all except the "little nun," who is always in black; and the mistress with the red feather still has her red feather, and a knot of red ribbon at her neck, all tumbled with the little paws of her scholars, who always make her laugh and flee.
It is the season, too, of cherry-trees, of butterflies, of music in the streets, and of rambles in the country; many of the fourth grade run away to bathe in the Po; all have their hearts already set on the vacation; each day they issue forth from school more impatient and content than the day before.
Only it pains me to see Garrone in mourning, and my poor mistress of the primary, who is thinner and whiter than ever, and who coughs with ever-increasing violence.
She walks all bent over now, and salutes me so sadly!
Friday, 26th.
You are now beginning to comprehend the poetry of school, Enrico; but at present you only survey the school from within.
It will seem much more beautiful and more poetic to you twenty years from now, when you go thither to escort your own boys; and you will then survey it from the outside, as I do.
While waiting for school to close, I wander about the silent street, in the vicinity of the edifice, and lay my ear to the windows of the ground floor, which are screened by Venetian blinds.
At one window I hear the voice of a schoolmistress saying:-
"Ah, what a shape for a t !
It won't do, my dear boy!
What would your father say to it?"
At the next window there resounds the heavy voice of a master, which is saying:-
"I will buy fifty metres of stuff-at four lire and a half the metre-and sell it again-"
Further on there is the mistress with the red feather, who is reading aloud:-
"Then Pietro Micca, with the lighted train of powder-"
From the adjoining class-room comes the chirping of a thousand birds, which signifies that the master has stepped out for a moment.
I proceed onward, and as I turn the corner, I hear a scholar weeping, and the voice of the mistress reproving and comforting him.
From the lofty windows issue verses, names of great and good men, fragments of sentences which inculcate virtue, the love of country, and courage.
Then ensue moments of silence, in which one would declare that the edifice is empty, and it does not seem possible that there should be seven hundred boys within; noisy outbursts of hilarity become audible, provoked by the jest of a master in a good humor.
And the people who are passing halt, and all direct a glance of sympathy towards that pleasing building, which contains so much youth and so many hopes.
Then a sudden dull sound is heard, a clapping to of books and portfolios, a shuffling of feet, a buzz which spreads from room to room, and from the lower to the higher, as at the sudden diffusion of a bit of good news: it is the beadle, who is making his rounds, announcing the dismissal of school.
And at that sound a throng of women, men, girls, and youths press closer from this side and that of the door, waiting for their sons, brothers, or grandchildren; while from the doors of the class-rooms little boys shoot forth into the big hall, as from a spout, seize their little capes and hats, creating a great confusion with them on the floor, and dancing all about, until the beadle chases them forth one after the other.
And at length they come forth, in long files, stamping their feet.
And then from all the relatives there descends a shower of questions: "Did you know your lesson?-How much work did they give you?-What have you to do for to-morrow!-When does the monthly examination come?"
And then even the poor mothers who do not know how to read, open the copy-books, gaze at the problems, and ask particulars: "Only eight?-Ten with commendation?-Nine for the lesson?"
And they grow uneasy, and rejoice, and interrogate the masters, and talk of prospectuses and examinations.
How beautiful all this is, and how great and how immense is its promise for the world!
THY FATHER.
Sunday, 28th.
The month of May could not have had a better ending than my visit of this morning.
We heard a jingling of the bell, and all ran to see what it meant.
I heard my father say in a tone of astonishment:-
"You here, Giorgio?"
Giorgio was our gardener in Chieri, who now has his family at Condove, and who had just arrived from Genoa, where he had disembarked on the preceding day, on his return from Greece, where he has been working on the railway for the last three years.
He had a big bundle in his arms.
He has grown a little older, but his face is still red and jolly.
My father wished to have him enter; but he refused, and suddenly inquired, assuming a serious expression:
"How is my family?
How is Gigia?"
"She was well a few days ago," replied my mother.
Giorgio uttered a deep sigh.
"Oh, God be praised!
I had not the courage to present myself at the Deaf-mute Institution until I had heard about her.
I will leave my bundle here, and run to get her.
It is three years since I have seen my poor little daughter!
Three years since I have seen any of my people!"
My father said to me, "Accompany him."
"Excuse me; one word more," said the gardener, from the landing.
My father interrupted him, "And your affairs?"
"All right," the other replied.
"Thanks to God, I have brought back a few soldi.
But I wanted to inquire.
Tell me how the education of the little dumb girl is getting on.
When I left her, she was a poor little animal, poor thing!
I don't put much faith in those colleges.
Has she learned how to make signs?
My wife did write to me, to be sure, 'She is learning to speak; she is making progress.'
But I said to myself, What is the use of her learning to talk if I don't know how to make the signs myself?
How shall we manage to understand each other, poor little thing?
That is well enough to enable them to understand each other, one unfortunate to comprehend another unfortunate.
How is she getting on, then?
How is she?"
My father smiled, and replied:-
"I shall not tell you anything about it; you will see; go, go; don't waste another minute!"
We took our departure; the institute is close by.
As we went along with huge strides, the gardener talked to me, and grew sad.
"Ah, my poor Gigia!
To be born with such an infirmity!
To think that I have never heard her call me father; that she has never heard me call her my daughter; that she has never either heard or uttered a single word since she has been in the world!
And it is lucky that a charitable gentleman was found to pay the expenses of the institution.
But that is all-she could not enter there until she was eight years old.
She has not been at home for three years.
She is now going on eleven.
And she has grown?
Tell me, she has grown?
She is in good spirits?"
"You will see in a moment, you will see in a moment," I replied, hastening my pace.
"But where is this institution?"
he demanded.
"My wife went with her after I was gone.
It seems to me that it ought to be near here."
We had just reached it.
We at once entered the parlor.
An attendant came to meet us.
"I am the father of Gigia Voggi," said the gardener; "give me my daughter instantly."
"They are at play," replied the attendant; "I will go and inform the matron."
And he hastened away.
The gardener could no longer speak nor stand still; he stared at all four walls, without seeing anything.
The door opened; a teacher entered, dressed in black, holding a little girl by the hand.
Father and daughter gazed at one another for an instant; then flew into each other's arms, uttering a cry.
The girl was dressed in a white and reddish striped material, with a gray apron.
She is a little taller than I.
She cried, and clung to her father's neck with both arms.
Her father disengaged himself, and began to survey her from head to foot, panting as though he had run a long way; and he exclaimed: "Ah, how she has grown!
How pretty she has become!
Oh, my dear, poor Gigia!
My poor mute child!-Are you her teacher, signora?
Tell her to make some of her signs to me; for I shall be able to understand something, and then I will learn little by little.
Tell her to make me understand something with her gestures."
The teacher smiled, and said in a low voice to the girl, "Who is this man who has come to see you?"
And the girl replied with a smile, in a coarse, strange, dissonant voice, like that of a savage who was speaking for the first time in our language, but with a distinct pronunciation, "He is my fa-ther."
The gardener fell back a pace, and shrieked like a madman: "She speaks!
Is it possible!
Is it possible!
She speaks?
Can you speak, my child?
can you speak?
Say something to me: you can speak?"
and he embraced her afresh, and kissed her thrice on the brow.
"But it is not with signs that she talks, signora; it is not with her fingers?
What does this mean?"
"No, Signor Voggi," rejoined the teacher, "it is not with signs.
That was the old way.
Here we teach the new method, the oral method.
How is it that you did not know it?"
"I knew nothing about it!"
replied the gardener, lost in amazement.
"I have been abroad for the last three years.
Oh, they wrote to me, and I did not understand.
I am a blockhead.
Oh, my daughter, you understand me, then?
Do you hear my voice?
Answer me: do you hear me?
Do you hear what I say?"
"Why, no, my good man," said the teacher; "she does not hear your voice, because she is deaf.
She understands from the movements of your lips what the words are that you utter; this is the way the thing is managed; but she does not hear your voice any more than she does the words which she speaks to you; she pronounces them, because we have taught her, letter by letter, how she must place her lips and move her tongue, and what effort she must make with her chest and throat, in order to emit a sound."
The gardener did not understand, and stood with his mouth wide open.
He did not yet believe it.
"Tell me, Gigia," he asked his daughter, whispering in her ear, "are you glad that your father has come back?"
and he raised his face again, and stood awaiting her reply.
The girl looked at him thoughtfully, and said nothing.
Her father was perturbed.
The teacher laughed.
Then she said: "My good man, she does not answer you, because she did not see the movements of your lips: you spoke in her ear!
Repeat your question, keeping your face well before hers."
The father, gazing straight in her face, repeated, "Are you glad that your father has come back?
that he is not going away again?"
The girl, who had observed his lips attentively, seeking even to see inside his mouth, replied frankly:-
"Yes, I am de-light-ed that you have re-turned, that you are not go-ing a-way a-gain-nev-er a-gain."
Her father embraced her impetuously, and then in great haste, in order to make quite sure, he overwhelmed her with questions.
"What is mamma's name?"
"An-to-nia."
"What is the name of your little sister?"
"Ad-e-laide."
"What is the name of this college?"
"The Deaf-mute Insti-tution."
"How many are two times ten?"
"Twen-ty."
While we thought that he was laughing for joy, he suddenly burst out crying.
But this was the result of joy also.
"Take courage," said the teacher to him; "you have reason to rejoice, not to weep.
You see that you are making your daughter cry also.
You are pleased, then?"
The gardener grasped the teacher's hand and kissed it two or three times, saying: "Thanks, thanks, thanks!
a hundred thanks, a thousand thanks, dear Signora Teacher!
and forgive me for not knowing how to say anything else!"
"But she not only speaks," said the teacher; "your daughter also knows how to write.
She knows how to reckon.
She knows the names of all common objects.
She knows a little history and geography.
She is now in the regular class.
When she has passed through the two remaining classes, she will know much more.
When she leaves here, she will be in a condition to adopt a profession.
We already have deaf-mutes who stand in the shops to serve customers, and they perform their duties like any one else."
Again the gardener was astounded.
It seemed as though his ideas were becoming confused again.
He stared at his daughter and scratched his head.
His face demanded another explanation.
Then the teacher turned to the attendant and said to him:-
"Call a child of the preparatory class for me."
The attendant returned, in a short time, with a deaf-mute of eight or nine years, who had entered the institution a few days before.
"This girl," said the mistress, "is one of those whom we are instructing in the first elements.
This is the way it is done.
I want to make her say a.
Pay attention."
The teacher opened her mouth, as one opens it to pronounce the vowel a, and motioned to the child to open her mouth in the same manner.
Then the mistress made her a sign to emit her voice.
She did so; but instead of a, she pronounced o.
"No," said the mistress, "that is not right."
And taking the child's two hands, she placed one of them on her own throat and the other on her chest, and repeated, " a."
The child felt with her hands the movements of the mistress's throat and chest, opened her mouth again as before, and pronounced extremely well, " a."
In the same manner, the mistress made her pronounce c and d, still keeping the two little hands on her own throat and chest.
"Now do you understand?"
she inquired.
The father understood; but he seemed more astonished than when he had not understood.
"And they are taught to speak in the same way?"
he asked, after a moment of reflection, gazing at the teacher.
"You have the patience to teach them to speak in that manner, little by little, and so many of them?
one by one-through years and years?
But you are saints; that's what you are!
You are angels of paradise!
There is not in the world a reward that is worthy of you!
What is there that I can say?
Ah!
leave me alone with my daughter a little while now.
Let me have her to myself for five minutes."
And drawing her to a seat apart he began to interrogate her, and she to reply, and he laughed with beaming eyes, slapping his fists down on his knees; and he took his daughter's hands, and stared at her, beside himself with delight at hearing her, as though her voice had been one which came from heaven; then he asked the teacher, "Would the Signor Director permit me to thank him?"
"The director is not here," replied the mistress; "but there is another person whom you should thank.
Every little girl here is given into the charge of an older companion, who acts the part of sister or mother to her.
Your little girl has been intrusted to the care of a deaf-mute of seventeen, the daughter of a baker, who is kind and very fond of her; she has been assisting her for two years to dress herself every morning; she combs her hair, she teaches her to sew, she mends her clothes, she is good company for her.-Luigia, what is the name of your mamma in the institute?"
The girl smiled, and said, "Ca-te-rina Gior-dano."
Then she said to her father, "She is ve-ry, ve-ry good."
The attendant, who had withdrawn at a signal from the mistress, returned almost at once with a light-haired deaf-mute, a robust girl, with a cheerful countenance, and also dressed in the red and white striped stuff, with a gray apron; she paused at the door and blushed; then she bent her head with a smile.
She had the figure of a woman, but seemed like a child.
Giorgio's daughter instantly ran to her, took her by the arm, like a child, and drew her to her father, saying, in her heavy voice, "Ca-te-rina Gior-dano."
"Ah, what a splendid girl!"
exclaimed her father; and he stretched out one hand to caress her, but drew it back again, and repeated, "Ah, what a good girl!
May God bless her, may He grant her all good fortune, all consolations; may He make her and hers always happy, so good a girl is she, my poor Gigia!
It is an honest workingman, the poor father of a family, who wishes you this with all his heart."
The big girl caressed the little one, still keeping her face bent, and smiling, and the gardener continued to gaze at her, as at a madonna.
"You can take your daughter with you for the day," said the mistress.
"Won't I take her, though!"
rejoined the gardener.
"I'll take her to Condove, and fetch her back to-morrow morning.
Think for a bit whether I won't take her!"
The girl ran off to dress.
"It is three years since I have seen her!"
repeated the gardener.
"Now she speaks!
I will take her to Condove with me on the instant.
But first I shall take a ramble about Turin, with my deaf-mute on my arm, so that all may see her, and take her to see some of my friends!
Ah, what a beautiful day!
This is consolation indeed!-Here's your father's arm, my Gigia."
The girl, who had returned with a little mantle and cap on, took his arm.
"And thanks to all!"
said the father, as he reached the threshold.
"Thanks to all, with my whole soul!
I shall come back another time to thank you all again."
He stood for a moment in thought, then disengaged himself abruptly from the girl, turned back, fumbling in his waistcoat with his hand, and shouted like a man in a fury:-
"Come now, I am not a poor devil!
So here, I leave twenty lire for the institution,-a fine new gold piece."
And with a tremendous bang, he deposited his gold piece on the table.
"No, no, my good man," said the mistress, with emotion.
"Take back your money.
I cannot accept it.
Take it back.
It is not my place.
You shall see about that when the director is here.
But he will not accept anything either; be sure of that.
You have toiled too hard to earn it, poor man.
We shall be greatly obliged to you, all the same."
"No; I shall leave it," replied the gardener, obstinately; "and then-we will see."
But the mistress put his money back in his pocket, without leaving him time to reject it.
And then he resigned himself with a shake of the head; and then, wafting a kiss to the mistress and to the large girl, he quickly took his daughter's arm again, and hurried with her out of the door, saying:-
"Come, come, my daughter, my poor dumb child, my treasure!"
And the girl exclaimed, in her harsh voice:-
"Oh, how beau-ti-ful the sun is!"
June 3d.
To-morrow is the National Festival Day.
TO-DAY is a day of national mourning.
Garibaldi died last night.
Do you know who he is?
He is the man who liberated ten millions of Italians from the tyranny of the Bourbons.
He died at the age of seventy-five.
He was born at Nice, the son of a ship captain.
At eight years of age, he saved a woman's life; at thirteen, he dragged into safety a boat-load of his companions who were shipwrecked; at twenty-seven, he rescued from the water at Marseilles a drowning youth; at forty-one, he saved a ship from burning on the ocean.
He fought for ten years in America for the liberty of a strange people; he fought in three wars against the Austrians, for the liberation of Lombardy and Trentino; he defended Rome from the French in 1849; he delivered Naples and Palermo in 1860; he fought again for Rome in 1867; he combated with the Germans in defence of France in 1870.
He was possessed of the flame of heroism and the genius of war.
He was engaged in forty battles, and won thirty-seven of them.
When he was not fighting, he was laboring for his living, or he shut himself up in a solitary island, and tilled the soil.
He was teacher, sailor, workman, trader, soldier, general, dictator.
He was simple, great, and good.
He hated all oppressors, he loved all peoples, he protected all the weak; he had no other aspiration than good, he refused honors, he scorned death, he adored Italy.
When he uttered his war-cry, legions of valorous men hastened to him from all quarters; gentlemen left their palaces, workmen their ships, youths their schools, to go and fight in the sunshine of his glory.
In time of war he wore a red shirt.
He was strong, blond, and handsome.
On the field of battle he was a thunder-bolt, in his affections he was a child, in affliction a saint.
Thousands of Italians have died for their country, happy, if, when dying, they saw him pass victorious in the distance; thousands would have allowed themselves to be killed for him; millions have blessed and will bless him.
He is dead.
The whole world mourns him.
You do not understand him now.
But you will read of his deeds, you will constantly hear him spoken of in the course of your life; and gradually, as you grow up, his image will grow before you; when you become a man, you will behold him as a giant; and when you are no longer in the world, when your sons' sons and those who shall be born from them are no longer among the living, the generations will still behold on high his luminous head as a redeemer of the peoples, crowned by the names of his victories as with a circlet of stars; and the brow and the soul of every Italian will beam when he utters his name.
THY FATHER.
Sunday, 11th.
The National Festival Day.
Postponed for a week on account of the death of Garibaldi.
We have been to the Piazza Castello, to see the review of soldiers, who defiled before the commandant of the army corps, between two vast lines of people.
As they marched past to the sound of flourishes from trumpets and bands, my father pointed out to me the Corps and the glories of the banners.
First, the pupils of the Academy, those who will become officers in the Engineers and the Artillery, about three hundred in number, dressed in black, passed with the bold and easy elegance of students and soldiers.
After them defiled the infantry, the brigade of Aosta, which fought at Goito and at San Martino, and the Bergamo brigade, which fought at Castelfidardo, four regiments of them, company after company, thousands of red aiguillettes, which seemed like so many double and very long garlands of blood-colored flowers, extended and agitated from the two ends, and borne athwart the crowd.
After the infantry, the soldiers of the Mining Corps advanced,-the workingmen of war, with their plumes of black horse-tails, and their crimson bands; and while these were passing, we beheld advancing behind them hundreds of long, straight plumes, which rose above the heads of the spectators; they were the mountaineers, the defenders of the portals of Italy, all tall, rosy, and stalwart, with hats of Calabrian fashion, and revers of a beautiful, bright green, the color of the grass on their native mountains.
The mountaineers were still marching past, when a quiver ran through the crowd, and the bersaglieri, the old twelfth battalion, the first who entered Rome through the breach at the Porta Pia, bronzed, alert, brisk, with fluttering plumes, passed like a wave in a sea of black, making the piazza ring with the shrill blasts of their trumpets, which seemed shouts of joy.
But their trumpeting was drowned by a broken and hollow rumble, which announced the field artillery; and then the latter passed in triumph, seated on their lofty caissons, drawn by three hundred pairs of fiery horses,-those fine soldiers with yellow lacings, and their long cannons of brass and steel gleaming on the light carriages, as they jolted and resounded, and made the earth tremble.
And then came the mountain artillery, slowly, gravely, beautiful in its laborious and rude semblance, with its large soldiers, with its powerful mules-that mountain artillery which carries dismay and death wherever man can set his foot.
And last of all, the fine regiment of the Genoese cavalry, which had wheeled down like a whirlwind on ten fields of battle, from Santa Lucia to Villafranca, passed at a gallop, with their helmets glittering in the sun, their lances erect, their pennons floating in the air, sparkling with gold and silver, filling the air with jingling and neighing.
"How beautiful it is!"
I exclaimed.
My father almost reproved me for these words, and said to me:-
"You are not to regard the army as a fine spectacle.
All these young men, so full of strength and hope, may be called upon any day to defend our country, and fall in a few hours, crushed to fragments by bullets and grape-shot.
Every time that you hear the cry, at a feast, 'Hurrah for the army!
hurrah for Italy!'
picture to yourself, behind the regiments which are passing, a plain covered with corpses, and inundated with blood, and then the greeting to the army will proceed from the very depths of your heart, and the image of Italy will appear to you more severe and grand."
Tuesday, 14th.
Salute your country thus, on days of festival: "Italy, my country, dear and noble land, where my father and my mother were born, and where they will be buried, where I hope to live and die, where my children will grow up and die; beautiful Italy, great and glorious for many centuries, united and free for a few years; thou who didst disseminate so great a light of intellect divine over the world, and for whom so many valiant men have died on the battle-field, and so many heroes on the gallows; august mother of three hundred cities, and thirty millions of sons; I, a child, who do not understand thee as yet, and who do not know thee in thy entirety, I venerate and love thee with all my soul, and I am proud of having been born of thee, and of calling myself thy son.
I love thy splendid seas and thy sublime mountains; I love thy solemn monuments and thy immortal memories; I love thy glory and thy beauty; I love and venerate the whole of thee as that beloved portion of thee where I, for the first time, beheld the light and heard thy name.
I love the whole of thee, with a single affection and with equal gratitude,-Turin the valiant, Genoa the superb, Bologna the learned, Venice the enchanting, Milan the mighty; I love you with the uniform reverence of a son, gentle Florence and terrible Palermo, immense and beautiful Naples, marvellous and eternal Rome.
I love thee, my sacred country!
And I swear that I will love all thy sons like brothers; that I will always honor in my heart thy great men, living and dead; that I will be an industrious and honest citizen, constantly intent on ennobling myself, in order to render myself worthy of thee, to assist with my small powers in causing misery, ignorance, injustice, crime, to disappear one day from thy face, so that thou mayest live and expand tranquilly in the majesty of thy right and of thy strength.
I swear that I will serve thee, as it may be granted to me, with my mind, with my arm, with my heart, humbly, ardently; and that, if the day should dawn in which I should be called on to give my blood for thee and my life, I will give my blood, and I will die, crying thy holy name to heaven, and wafting my last kiss to thy blessed banner."
THY FATHER.
Friday, 16th.
During the five days which have passed since the National Festival, the heat has increased by three degrees.
We are in full summer now, and begin to feel weary; all have lost their fine rosy color of springtime; necks and legs are growing thin, heads droop and eyes close.
Poor Nelli, who suffers much from the heat, has turned the color of wax in the face; he sometimes falls into a heavy sleep, with his head on his copy-book; but Garrone is always watchful, and places an open book upright in front of him, so that the master may not see him.
Crossi rests his red head against the bench in a certain way, so that it looks as though it had been detached from his body and placed there separately.
Nobis complains that there are too many of us, and that we corrupt the air.
Ah, what an effort it costs now to study!
I gaze through the windows at those beautiful trees which cast so deep a shade, where I should be so glad to run, and sadness and wrath overwhelm me at being obliged to go and shut myself up among the benches.
But then I take courage at the sight of my kind mother, who is always watching me, scrutinizing me, when I return from school, to see whether I am not pale; and at every page of my work she says to me:-
"Do you still feel well?"
and every morning at six, when she wakes me for my lesson, "Courage!
there are only so many days more: then you will be free, and will get rested,-you will go to the shade of country lanes."
Yes, she is perfectly right to remind me of the boys who are working in the fields in the full heat of the sun, or among the white sands of the river, which blind and scorch them, and of those in the glass-factories, who stand all day long motionless, with head bent over a flame of gas; and all of them rise earlier than we do, and have no vacations.
Courage, then!
And even in this respect, Derossi is at the head of all, for he suffers neither from heat nor drowsiness; he is always wide awake, and cheery, with his golden curls, as he was in the winter, and he studies without effort, and keeps all about him alert, as though he freshened the air with his voice.
And there are two others, also, who are always awake and attentive: stubborn Stardi, who pricks his face, to prevent himself from going to sleep; and the more weary and heated he is, the more he sets his teeth, and he opens his eyes so wide that it seems as though he wanted to eat the teacher; and that barterer of a Garoffi, who is wholly absorbed in manufacturing fans out of red paper, decorated with little figures from match-boxes, which he sells at two centesimi apiece.
But the bravest of all is Coretti; poor Coretti, who gets up at five o'clock, to help his father carry wood!
At eleven, in school, he can no longer keep his eyes open, and his head droops on his breast.
And nevertheless, he shakes himself, punches himself on the back of the neck, asks permission to go out and wash his face, and makes his neighbors shake and pinch him.
But this morning he could not resist, and he fell into a leaden sleep.
The master called him loudly; "Coretti!"
He did not hear.
The master, irritated, repeated, "Coretti!"
Then the son of the charcoal-man, who lives next to him at home, rose and said:-
"He worked from five until seven carrying faggots."
The teacher allowed him to sleep on, and continued with the lesson for half an hour.
Then he went to Coretti's seat, and wakened him very, very gently, by blowing in his face.
On beholding the master in front of him, he started back in alarm.
But the master took his head in his hands, and said, as he kissed him on the hair:-
"I am not reproving you, my son.
Your sleep is not at all that of laziness; it is the sleep of fatigue."
Saturday, 17th.
Surely, neither your comrade Coretti nor Garrone would ever have answered their fathers as you answered yours this afternoon.
Enrico!
How is it possible?
You must promise me solemnly that this shall never happen again so long as I live.
Every time that an impertinent reply flies to your lips at a reproof from your father, think of that day which will infallibly come when he will call you to his bedside to tell you, "Enrico, I am about to leave you."
Oh, my son, when you hear his voice for the last time, and for a long while afterwards, when you weep alone in his deserted room, in the midst of those books which he will never open again, then, on recalling that you have at times been wanting in respect to him, you, too, will ask yourself, "How is it possible?"
Then you will understand that he has always been your best friend, that when he was constrained to punish you, it caused him more suffering than it did you, and that he never made you weep except for the sake of doing you good; and then you will repent, and you will kiss with tears that desk at which he worked so much, at which he wore out his life for his children.
You do not understand now; he hides from you all of himself except his kindness and his love.
You do not know that he is sometimes so broken down with toil that he thinks he has only a few more days to live, and that at such moments he talks only of you; he has in his heart no other trouble than that of leaving you poor and without protection.
And how often, when meditating on this, does he enter your chamber while you are asleep, and stand there, lamp in hand, gazing at you; and then he makes an effort, and weary and sad as he is, he returns to his labor; and neither do you know that he often seeks you and remains with you because he has a bitterness in his heart, sorrows which attack all men in the world, and he seeks you as a friend, to obtain consolation himself and forgetfulness, and he feels the need of taking refuge in your affection, to recover his serenity and his courage: think, then, what must be his sorrow, when instead of finding in you affection, he finds coldness and disrespect!
Never again stain yourself with this horrible ingratitude!
Reflect, that were you as good as a saint, you could never repay him sufficiently for what he has done and for what he is constantly doing for you.
And reflect, also, we cannot count on life; a misfortune might remove your father while you are still a boy,-in two years, in three months, to-morrow.
Ah, my poor Enrico, when you see all about you changing, how empty, how desolate the house will appear, with your poor mother clothed in black!
Go, my son, go to your father; he is in his room at work; go on tiptoe, so that he may not hear you enter; go and lay your forehead on his knees, and beseech him to pardon and to bless you.
THY MOTHER.
Monday, 19th.
My good father forgave me, even on this occasion, and allowed me to go on an expedition to the country, which had been arranged on Wednesday, with the father of Coretti, the wood-peddler.
We were all in need of a mouthful of hill air.
It was a festival day.
We met yesterday at two o'clock in the place of the Statuto, Derossi, Garrone, Garoffi, Precossi, Coretti, father and son, and I, with our provisions of fruit, sausages, and hard-boiled eggs; we had also leather bottles and tin cups.
Garrone carried a gourd filled with white wine; Coretti, his father's soldier-canteen, full of red wine; and little Precossi, in the blacksmith's blouse, held under his arm a two-kilogramme loaf.
We went in the omnibus as far as Gran Madre di Dio, and then off, as briskly as possible, to the hills.
How green, how shady, how fresh it was!
We rolled over and over in the grass, we dipped our faces in the rivulets, we leaped the hedges.
The elder Coretti followed us at a distance, with his jacket thrown over his shoulders, smoking his clay pipe, and from time to time threatening us with his hand, to prevent our tearing holes in our trousers.
Precossi whistled; I had never heard him whistle before.
The younger Coretti did the same, as he went along.
That little fellow knows how to make everything with his jack-knife a finger's length long,-mill-wheels, forks, squirts; and he insisted on carrying the other boys' things, and he was loaded down until he was dripping with perspiration, but he was still as nimble as a goat.
Derossi halted every moment to tell us the names of the plants and insects.
I don't understand how he manages to know so many things.
And Garrone nibbled at his bread in silence; but he no longer attacks it with the cheery bites of old, poor Garrone!
now that he has lost his mother.
But he is always as good as bread himself.
When one of us ran back to obtain the momentum for leaping a ditch, he ran to the other side, and held out his hands to us; and as Precossi was afraid of cows, having been tossed by one when a child, Garrone placed himself in front of him every time that we passed any.
We mounted up to Santa Margherita, and then went down the decline by leaps, rolls, and slides.
Precossi tumbled into a thorn-bush, and tore a hole in his blouse, and stood there overwhelmed with shame, with the strip dangling; but Garoffi, who always has pins in his jacket, fixed it so that it was not perceptible, while the other kept saying, "Excuse me, excuse me," and then he set out to run once more.
Garoffi did not waste his time on the way; he picked salad herbs and snails, and put every stone that glistened in the least into his pocket, supposing that there was gold and silver in it.
And on we went, running, rolling, and climbing through the shade and in the sun, up and down, through all the lanes and cross-roads, until we arrived dishevelled and breathless at the crest of a hill, where we seated ourselves to take our lunch on the grass.
We could see an immense plain, and all the blue Alps with their white summits.
We were dying of hunger; the bread seemed to be melting.
The elder Coretti handed us our portions of sausage on gourd leaves.
And then we all began to talk at once about the teachers, the comrades who had not been able to come, and the examinations.
Precossi was rather ashamed to eat, and Garrone thrust the best bits of his share into his mouth by force.
Coretti was seated next his father, with his legs crossed; they seem more like two brothers than father and son, when seen thus together, both rosy and smiling, with those white teeth of theirs.
The father drank with zest, emptying the bottles and the cups which we left half finished, and said:-
"Wine hurts you boys who are studying; it is the wood-sellers who need it."
Then he grasped his son by the nose, and shook him, saying to us, "Boys, you must love this fellow, for he is a flower of a man of honor; I tell you so myself!"
And then we all laughed, except Garrone.
And he went on, as he drank, "It's a shame, eh!
now you are all good friends together, and in a few years, who knows, Enrico and Derossi will be lawyers or professors or I don't know what, and the other four of you will be in shops or at a trade, and the deuce knows where, and then-good night comrades!"
"Nonsense!"
rejoined Derossi; "for me, Garrone will always be Garrone, Precossi will always be Precossi, and the same with all the others, were I to become the emperor of Russia: where they are, there I shall go also."
"Bless you!"
exclaimed the elder Coretti, raising his flask; "that's the way to talk, by Heavens!
Touch your glass here!
Hurrah for brave comrades, and hurrah for school, which makes one family of you, of those who have and those who have not!"
We all clinked his flask with the skins and the cups, and drank for the last time.
"Hurrah for the fourth of the 49th!"
he cried, as he rose to his feet, and swallowed the last drop; "and if you have to do with squadrons too, see that you stand firm, like us old ones, my lads!"
It was already late.
We descended, running and singing, and walking long distances all arm in arm, and we arrived at the Po as twilight fell, and thousands of fireflies were flitting about.
And we only parted in the Piazza dello Statuto after having agreed to meet there on the following Sunday, and go to the Vittorio Emanuele to see the distribution of prizes to the graduates of the evening schools.
What a beautiful day!
How happy I should have been on my return home, had I not encountered my poor schoolmistress!
I met her coming down the staircase of our house, almost in the dark, and, as soon as she recognized me, she took both my hands, and whispered in my ear, "Good by, Enrico; remember me!"
I perceived that she was weeping.
I went up and told my mother about it.
"I have just met my schoolmistress.
"-"She was just going to bed," replied my mother, whose eyes were red.
And then she added very sadly, gazing intently at me, "Your poor teacher-is very ill."
Sunday, 25th.
As we had agreed, we all went together to the Theatre Vittorio Emanuele, to view the distribution of prizes to the workingmen.
The theatre was adorned as on the 14th of March, and thronged, but almost wholly with the families of workmen; and the pit was occupied with the male and female pupils of the school of choral singing.
These sang a hymn to the soldiers who had died in the Crimea; which was so beautiful that, when it was finished, all rose and clapped and shouted, so that the song had to be repeated from the beginning.
And then the prize-winners began immediately to march past the mayor, the prefect, and many others, who presented them with books, savings-bank books, diplomas, and medals.
In one corner of the pit I espied the little mason, sitting beside his mother; and in another place there was the head-master; and behind him, the red head of my master of the second grade.
The first to defile were the pupils of the evening drawing classes-the goldsmiths, engravers, lithographers, and also the carpenters and masons; then those of the commercial school; then those of the Musical Lyceum, among them several girls, workingwomen, all dressed in festal attire, who were saluted with great applause, and who laughed.
Last came the pupils of the elementary evening schools, and then it began to be a beautiful sight.
They were of all ages, of all trades, and dressed in all sorts of ways,-men with gray hair, factory boys, artisans with big black beards.
The little ones were at their ease; the men, a little embarrassed.
The people clapped the oldest and the youngest, but none of the spectators laughed, as they did at our festival: all faces were attentive and serious.
Many of the prize-winners had wives and children in the pit, and there were little children who, when they saw their father pass across the stage, called him by name at the tops of their voices, and signalled to him with their hands, laughing violently.
Peasants passed, and porters; they were from the Buoncompagni School.
From the Cittadella School there was a bootblack whom my father knew, and the prefect gave him a diploma.
After him I saw approaching a man as big as a giant, whom I fancied that I had seen several times before.
It was the father of the little mason, who had won the second prize.
I remembered when I had seen him in the garret, at the bedside of his sick son, and I immediately sought out his son in the pit.
Poor little mason!
he was staring at his father with beaming eyes, and, in order to conceal his emotion, he made his hare's face.
At that moment I heard a burst of applause, and I glanced at the stage: a little chimney-sweep stood there, with a clean face, but in his working-clothes, and the mayor was holding him by the hand and talking to him.
After the chimney-sweep came a cook; then came one of the city sweepers, from the Raineri School, to get a prize.
I felt I know not what in my heart,-something like a great affection and a great respect, at the thought of how much those prizes had cost all those workingmen, fathers of families, full of care; how much toil added to their labors, how many hours snatched from their sleep, of which they stand in such great need, and what efforts of intelligences not habituated to study, and of huge hands rendered clumsy with work!
A factory boy passed, and it was evident that his father had lent him his jacket for the occasion, for his sleeves hung down so that he was forced to turn them back on the stage, in order to receive his prize: and many laughed; but the laugh was speedily stifled by the applause.
Next came an old man with a bald head and a white beard.
Several artillery soldiers passed, from among those who attended evening school in our schoolhouse; then came custom-house guards and policemen, from among those who guard our schools.
At the conclusion, the pupils of the evening schools again sang the hymn to the dead in the Crimea, but this time with so much dash, with a strength of affection which came so directly from the heart, that the audience hardly applauded at all, and all retired in deep emotion, slowly and noiselessly.
In a few moments the whole street was thronged.
In front of the entrance to the theatre was the chimney-sweep, with his prize book bound in red, and all around were gentlemen talking to him.
Many exchanged salutations from the opposite side of the street,-workmen, boys, policemen, teachers.
My master of the second grade came out in the midst of the crowd, between two artillery men.
And there were workmen's wives with babies in their arms, who held in their tiny hands their father's diploma, and exhibited it to the crowd in their pride.
Tuesday, 27th.
While we were at the Theatre Vittorio Emanuele, my poor schoolmistress died.
She died at two o'clock, a week after she had come to see my mother.
The head-master came to the school yesterday morning to announce it to us; and he said:-
"Those of you who were her pupils know how good she was, how she loved her boys: she was a mother to them.
Now, she is no more.
For a long time a terrible malady has been sapping her life.
If she had not been obliged to work to earn her bread, she could have taken care of herself, and perhaps recovered.
At all events, she could have prolonged her life for several months, if she had procured a leave of absence.
But she wished to remain among her boys to the very last day.
On the evening of Saturday, the seventeenth, she took leave of them, with the certainty that she should never see them again.
She gave them good advice, kissed them all, and went away sobbing.
No one will ever behold her again.
Remember her, my boys!"
Little Precossi, who had been one of her pupils in the upper primary, dropped his head on his desk and began to cry.
Yesterday afternoon, after school, we all went together to the house of the dead woman, to accompany her to church.
There was a hearse in the street, with two horses, and many people were waiting, and conversing in a low voice.
There was the head-master, all the masters and mistresses from our school, and from the other schoolhouses where she had taught in bygone years.
There were nearly all the little children in her classes, led by the hand by their mothers, who carried tapers; and there were a very great many from the other classes, and fifty scholars from the Baretti School, some with wreaths in their hands, some with bunches of roses.
A great many bouquets of flowers had already been placed on the hearse, upon which was fastened a large wreath of acacia, with an inscription in black letters: The old pupils of the fourth grade to their mistress.
And under the large wreath a little one was suspended, which the babies had brought.
Among the crowd were visible many servant-women, who had been sent by their mistresses with candles; and there were also two serving-men in livery, with lighted torches; and a wealthy gentleman, the father of one of the mistress's scholars, had sent his carriage, lined with blue satin.
All were crowded together near the door.
Several girls were wiping away their tears.
We waited for a while in silence.
At length the casket was brought out.
Some of the little ones began to cry loudly when they saw the coffin slid into the hearse, and one began to shriek, as though he had only then comprehended that his mistress was dead, and he was seized with such a convulsive fit of sobbing, that they were obliged to carry him away.
The procession got slowly into line and set out.
First came the daughters of the Ritiro della Concezione, dressed in green; then the daughters of Maria, all in white, with a blue ribbon; then the priests; and behind the hearse, the masters and mistresses, the tiny scholars of the upper primary, and all the others; and, at the end of all, the crowd.
People came to the windows and to the doors, and on seeing all those boys, and the wreath, they said, "It is a schoolmistress."
Even some of the ladies who accompanied the smallest children wept.
When the church was reached, the casket was removed from the hearse, and carried to the middle of the nave, in front of the great altar: the mistresses laid their wreaths on it, the children covered it with flowers, and the people all about, with lighted candles in their hands, began to chant the prayers in the vast and gloomy church.
Then, all of a sudden, when the priest had said the last amen, the candles were extinguished, and all went away in haste, and the mistress was left alone.
Poor mistress, who was so kind to me, who had so much patience, who had toiled for so many years!
She has left her little books to her scholars, and everything which she possessed,-to one an inkstand, to another a little picture; and two days before her death, she said to the head-master that he was not to allow the smallest of them to go to her funeral, because she did not wish them to cry.
She has done good, she has suffered, she is dead!
Poor mistress, left alone in that dark church!
Farewell!
Farewell forever, my kind friend, sad and sweet memory of my infancy!
Wednesday, 28th.
My poor schoolmistress wanted to finish her year of school: she departed only three days before the end of the lessons.
Day after to-morrow we go once more to the schoolroom to hear the reading of the monthly story, Shipwreck, and then-it is over.
On Saturday, the first of July, the examinations begin.
And then another year, the fourth, is past!
And if my mistress had not died, it would have passed well.
I thought over all that I had known on the preceding October, and it seems to me that I know a good deal more: I have so many new things in my mind; I can say and write what I think better than I could then; I can also do the sums of many grown-up men who know nothing about it, and help them in their affairs; and I understand much more: I understand nearly everything that I read.
I am satisfied.
But how many people have urged me on and helped me to learn, one in one way, and another in another, at home, at school, in the street,-everywhere where I have been and where I have seen anything!
And now, I thank you all.
I thank you first, my good teacher, for having been so indulgent and affectionate with me; for you every new acquisition of mine was a labor, for which I now rejoice and of which I am proud.
I thank you, Derossi, my admirable companion, for your prompt and kind explanations, for you have made me understand many of the most difficult things, and overcome stumbling-blocks at examinations; and you, too, Stardi, you brave and strong boy, who have showed me how a will of iron succeeds in everything: and you, kind, generous Garrone, who make all those who know you kind and generous too; and you too, Precossi and Coretti, who have given me an example of courage in suffering, and of serenity in toil, I render thanks to you: I render thanks to all the rest.
But above all, I thank thee, my father, thee, my first teacher, my first friend, who hast given me so many wise counsels, and hast taught me so many things, whilst thou wert working for me, always concealing thy sadness from me, and seeking in all ways to render study easy, and life beautiful to me; and thee, sweet mother, my beloved and blessed guardian angel, who hast tasted all my joys, and suffered all my bitternesses, who hast studied, worked, and wept with me, with one hand caressing my brow, and with the other pointing me to heaven.
I kneel before you, as when I was a little child; I thank you for all the tenderness which you have instilled into my mind through twelve years of sacrifices and of love.
(Last Monthly Story.)
One morning in the month of December, several years ago, there sailed from the port of Liverpool a huge steamer, which had on board two hundred persons, including a crew of sixty.
The captain and nearly all the sailors were English.
Among the passengers there were several Italians,-three gentlemen, a priest, and a company of musicians.
The steamer was bound for the island of Malta.
The weather was threatening.
Among the third-class passengers forward, was an Italian lad of a dozen years, small for his age, but robust; a bold, handsome, austere face, of Sicilian type.
He was alone near the fore-mast, seated on a coil of cordage, beside a well-worn valise, which contained his effects, and upon which he kept a hand.
His face was brown, and his black and wavy hair descended to his shoulders.
He was meanly clad, and had a tattered mantle thrown over his shoulders, and an old leather pouch on a cross-belt.
He gazed thoughtfully about him at the passengers, the ship, the sailors who were running past, and at the restless sea.
He had the appearance of a boy who has recently issued from a great family sorrow,-the face of a child, the expression of a man.
A little after their departure, one of the steamer's crew, an Italian with gray hair, made his appearance on the bow, holding by the hand a little girl; and coming to a halt in front of the little Sicilian, he said to him:-
"Here's a travelling companion for you, Mario."
Then he went away.
The girl seated herself on the pile of cordage beside the boy.
They surveyed each other.
"Where are you going?"
asked the Sicilian.
The girl replied: "To Malta on the way of Naples."
Then she added: "I am going to see my father and mother, who are expecting me.
My name is Giulietta Faggiani."
The boy said nothing.
After the lapse of a few minutes, he drew some bread from his pouch, and some dried fruit; the girl had some biscuits: they began to eat.
"Look sharp there!"
shouted the Italian sailor, as he passed rapidly; "a lively time is at hand!"
The wind continued to increase, the steamer pitched heavily; but the two children, who did not suffer from seasickness, paid no heed to it.
The little girl smiled.
She was about the same age as her companion, but was considerably taller, brown of complexion, slender, somewhat sickly, and dressed more than modestly.
Her hair was short and curling, she wore a red kerchief over her head, and two hoops of silver in her ears.
As they ate, they talked about themselves and their affairs.
The boy had no longer either father or mother.
The father, an artisan, had died a few days previously in Liverpool, leaving him alone; and the Italian consul had sent him back to his country, to Palermo, where he had still some distant relatives left.
The little girl had been taken to London, the year before, by a widowed aunt, who was very fond of her, and to whom her parents-poor people-had given her for a time, trusting in a promise of an inheritance; but the aunt had died a few months later, run over by an omnibus, without leaving a centesimo; and then she too had had recourse to the consul, who had shipped her to Italy.
Both had been recommended to the care of the Italian sailor.-"So," concluded the little maid, "my father and mother thought that I would return rich, and instead I am returning poor.
But they will love me all the same.
And so will my brothers.
I have four, all small.
I am the oldest at home.
I dress them.
They will be greatly delighted to see me.
They will come in on tiptoe-The sea is ugly!"
Then she asked the boy: "And are you going to stay with your relatives?"
"Yes-if they want me."
"Do not they love you?"
"I don't know."
"I shall be thirteen at Christmas," said the girl.
Then they began to talk about the sea, and the people on board around them.
They remained near each other all day, exchanging a few words now and then.
The passengers thought them brother and sister.
The girl knitted at a stocking, the boy meditated, the sea continued to grow rougher.
At night, as they parted to go to bed, the girl said to Mario, "Sleep well."
"No one will sleep well, my poor children!"
exclaimed the Italian sailor as he ran past, in answer to a call from the captain.
The boy was on the point of replying with a "good night" to his little friend, when an unexpected dash of water dealt him a violent blow, and flung him against a seat.
"My dear, you are bleeding!"
cried the girl, flinging herself upon him.
The passengers who were making their escape below, paid no heed to them.
The child knelt down beside Mario, who had been stunned by the blow, wiped the blood from his brow, and pulling the red kerchief from her hair, she bound it about his head, then pressed his head to her breast in order to knot the ends, and thus received a spot of blood on her yellow bodice just above the girdle.
Mario shook himself and rose:
"Are you better?"
asked the girl.
"I no longer feel it," he replied.
"Sleep well," said Giulietta.
"Good night," responded Mario.
And they descended two neighboring sets of steps to their dormitories.
The sailor's prediction proved correct.
Before they could get to sleep, a frightful tempest had broken loose.
It was like the sudden onslaught of furious great horses, which in the course of a few minutes split one mast, and carried away three boats which were suspended to the falls, and four cows on the bow, like leaves.
On board the steamer there arose a confusion, a terror, an uproar, a tempest of shrieks, wails, and prayers, sufficient to make the hair stand on end.
The tempest continued to increase in fury all night.
At daybreak it was still increasing.
The formidable waves dashing the craft transversely, broke over the deck, and smashed, split, and hurled everything into the sea.
The platform which screened the engine was destroyed, and the water dashed in with a terrible roar; the fires were extinguished; the engineers fled; huge and impetuous streams forced their way everywhere.
A voice of thunder shouted:
"To the pumps!"
It was the captain's voice.
The sailors rushed to the pumps.
But a sudden burst of the sea, striking the vessel on the stern, demolished bulwarks and hatchways, and sent a flood within.
All the passengers, more dead than alive, had taken refuge in the grand saloon.
At last the captain made his appearance.
"Captain!
Captain!"
they all shrieked in concert.
"What is taking place?
Where are we?
Is there any hope!
Save us!"
The captain waited until they were silent, then said coolly; "Let us be resigned."
One woman uttered a cry of "Mercy!"
No one else could give vent to a sound.
Terror had frozen them all.
A long time passed thus, in a silence like that of the grave.
All gazed at each other with blanched faces.
The sea continued to rage and roar.
The vessel pitched heavily.
At one moment the captain attempted to launch one life-boat; five sailors entered it; the boat sank; the waves turned it over, and two of the sailors were drowned, among them the Italian: the others contrived with difficulty to catch hold of the ropes and draw themselves up again.
After this, the sailors themselves lost all courage.
Two hours later, the vessel was sunk in the water to the height of the port-holes.
A terrible spectacle was presented meanwhile on the deck.
Mothers pressed their children to their breasts in despair; friends exchanged embraces and bade each other farewell; some went down into the cabins that they might die without seeing the sea.
One passenger shot himself in the head with a pistol, and fell headlong down the stairs to the cabin, where he expired.
Many clung frantically to each other; women writhed in horrible convulsions.
There was audible a chorus of sobs, of infantile laments, of strange and piercing voices; and here and there persons were visible motionless as statues, in stupor, with eyes dilated and sightless,-faces of corpses and madmen.
The two children, Giulietta and Mario, clung to a mast and gazed at the sea with staring eyes, as though senseless.
The sea had subsided a little; but the vessel continued to sink slowly.
Only a few minutes remained to them.
"Launch the long-boat!"
shouted the captain.
A boat, the last that remained, was thrown into the water, and fourteen sailors and three passengers descended into it.
The captain remained on board.
"Come down with us!"
they shouted to him from below.
"I must die at my post," replied the captain.
"We shall meet a vessel," the sailors cried to him; "we shall be saved!
Come down!
you are lost!"
"I shall remain."
"There is room for one more!"
shouted the sailors, turning to the other passengers.
"A woman!"
A woman advanced, aided by the captain; but on seeing the distance at which the boat lay, she did not feel sufficient courage to leap down, and fell back upon the deck.
The other women had nearly all fainted, and were as dead.
"A boy!"
shouted the sailors.
At that shout, the Sicilian lad and his companion, who had remained up to that moment petrified as by a supernatural stupor, were suddenly aroused again by a violent instinct to save their lives.
They detached themselves simultaneously from the mast, and rushed to the side of the vessel, shrieking in concert: "Take me!"
and endeavoring in turn, to drive the other back, like furious beasts.
"The smallest!"
shouted the sailors.
"The boat is overloaded!
The smallest!"
On hearing these words, the girl dropped her arms, as though struck by lightning, and stood motionless, staring at Mario with lustreless eyes.
Mario looked at her for a moment,-saw the spot of blood on her bodice,-remembered-The gleam of a divine thought flashed across his face.
"The smallest!"
shouted the sailors in chorus, with imperious impatience.
"We are going!"
And then Mario, with a voice which no longer seemed his own, cried: "She is the lighter!
It is for you, Giulietta!
You have a father and mother!
I am alone!
I give you my place!
Go down!"
"Throw her into the sea!"
shouted the sailors.
Mario seized Giulietta by the body, and threw her into the sea.
The girl uttered a cry and made a splash; a sailor seized her by the arm, and dragged her into the boat.
The boy remained at the vessel's side, with his head held high, his hair streaming in the wind,-motionless, tranquil, sublime.
The boat moved off just in time to escape the whirlpool which the vessel produced as it sank, and which threatened to overturn it.
Then the girl, who had remained senseless until that moment, raised her eyes to the boy, and burst into a storm of tears.
"Good by, Mario!"
she cried, amid her sobs, with her arms outstretched towards him.
"Good by!
Good by!
Good by!"
"Good by!"
replied the boy, raising his hand on high.
The boat went swiftly away across the troubled sea, beneath the dark sky.
No one on board the vessel shouted any longer.
The water was already lapping the edge of the deck.
Suddenly the boy fell on his knees, with his hands folded and his eyes raised to heaven.
The girl covered her face.
When she raised her head again, she cast a glance over the sea: the vessel was no longer there.
Saturday, 1st.
So the year has come to an end, Enrico, and it is well that you should be left on the last day with the image of the sublime child, who gave his life for his friend.
You are now about to part from your teachers and companions, and I must impart to you some sad news.
The separation will last not three months, but forever.
Your father, for reasons connected with his profession, is obliged to leave Turin, and we are all to go with him.
We shall go next autumn.
You will have to enter a new school.
You are sorry for this, are you not?
For I am sure that you love your old school, where twice a day, for the space of four years, you have experienced the pleasure of working, where for so long a time, you have seen, at stated hours, the same boys, the same teachers, the same parents, and your own father or mother awaiting you with a smile; your old school, where your mind first unclosed, where you have found so many kind companions, where every word that you have heard has had your good for its object, and where you have not suffered a single displeasure which has not been useful to you!
Then bear this affection with you, and bid these boys a hearty farewell.
Some of them will experience misfortunes, they will soon lose their fathers and mothers; others will die young; others, perhaps, will nobly shed their blood in battle; many will become brave and honest workmen, the fathers of honest and industrious workmen like themselves; and who knows whether there may not also be among them one who will render great services to his country, and make his name glorious.
Then part from them with affection; leave a portion of your soul here, in this great family into which you entered as a baby, and from which you emerge a young lad, and which your father and mother loved so dearly, because you were so much beloved by it.
School is a mother, my Enrico.
It took you from my arms when you could hardly speak, and now it returns you to me, strong, good, studious; blessings on it, and may you never forget it more, my son.
Oh, it is impossible that you should forget it!
You will become a man, you will make the tour of the world, you will see immense cities and wonderful monuments, and you will remember many among them; but that modest white edifice, with those closed shutters and that little garden, where the first flower of your intelligence budded, you will perceive until the last day of your life, as I shall always behold the house in which I heard your voice for the first time.
THY MOTHER.
Tuesday, 4th.
Here are the examinations at last!
Nothing else is to be heard under discussion, in the streets in the vicinity of the school, from boys, fathers, mothers, and even tutors; examinations, points, themes, averages, dismissals, promotions: all utter the same words.
Yesterday morning there was composition; this morning there is arithmetic.
It was touching to see all the parents, as they conducted their sons to school, giving them their last advice in the street, and many mothers accompanied their sons to their seats, to see whether the inkstand was filled, and to try their pens, and they still continued to hover round the entrance, and to say:
"Courage!
Attention!
I entreat you."
Our assistant-master was Coatti, the one with the black beard, who mimics the voice of a lion, and never punishes any one.
There were boys who were white with fear.
When the master broke the seal of the letter from the town-hall, and drew out the problem, not a breath was audible.
He announced the problem loudly, staring now at one, now at another, with terrible eyes; but we understood that had he been able to announce the answer also, so that we might all get promoted, he would have been delighted.
After an hour of work many began to grow weary, for the problem was difficult.
One cried.
Crossi dealt himself blows on the head.
And many of them are not to blame, poor boys, for not knowing, for they have not had much time to study, and have been neglected by their parents.
But Providence was at hand.
You should have seen Derossi, and what trouble he took to help them; how ingenious he was in getting a figure passed on, and in suggesting an operation, without allowing himself to be caught; so anxious for all that he appeared to be our teacher himself.
Garrone, too, who is strong in arithmetic, helped all he could; and he even assisted Nobis, who, finding himself in a quandary, was quite gentle.
Stardi remained motionless for more than an hour, with his eyes on the problem, and his fists on his temples, and then he finished the whole thing in five minutes.
The master made his round among the benches, saying:-
"Be calm!
Be calm!
I advise you to be calm!"
And when he saw that any one was discouraged, he opened his mouth, as though about to devour him, in imitation of a lion, in order to make him laugh and inspire him with courage.
Toward eleven o'clock, peeping down through the blinds, I perceived many parents pacing the street in their impatience.
There was Precossi's father, in his blue blouse, who had deserted his shop, with his face still quite black.
There was Crossi's mother, the vegetable-vender; and Nelli's mother, dressed in black, who could not stand still.
A little before mid-day, my father arrived and raised his eyes to my window; my dear father!
At noon we had all finished.
And it was a sight at the close of school!
Every one ran to meet the boys, to ask questions, to turn over the leaves of the copy-books to compare them with the work of their comrades.
"How many operations?
What is the total?
And subtraction?
And the answer?
And the punctuation of decimals?"
All the masters were running about hither and thither, summoned in a hundred directions.
My father instantly took from my hand the rough copy, looked at it, and said, "That's well."
Beside us was the blacksmith, Precossi, who was also inspecting his son's work, but rather uneasily, and not comprehending it.
He turned to my father:-
"Will you do me the favor to tell me the total?"
My father read the number.
The other gazed and reckoned.
"Brave little one!"
he exclaimed, in perfect content.
And my father and he gazed at each other for a moment with a kindly smile, like two friends.
My father offered his hand, and the other shook it; and they parted, saying, "Farewell until the oral examination."
"Until the oral examination."
After proceeding a few paces, we heard a falsetto voice which made us turn our heads.
It was the blacksmith-ironmonger singing.
Friday, 7th.
This morning we had our oral examinations.
At eight o'clock we were all in the schoolroom, and at a quarter past they began to call us, four at a time, into the big hall, where there was a large table covered with a green cloth; round it were seated the head-master and four other masters, among them our own.
I was one of the first called out.
Poor master!
how plainly I perceived this morning that you are really fond of us!
While they were interrogating the others, he had no eyes for any one but us.
He was troubled when we were uncertain in our replies; he grew serene when we gave a fine answer; he heard everything, and made us a thousand signs with his hand and head, to say to us, "Good!-no!-pay attention!-slower!-courage!"
He would have suggested everything to us, had he been able to talk.
If the fathers of all these pupils had been in his place, one after the other, they could not have done more.
They would have cried "Thanks!"
ten times, in the face of them all.
And when the other masters said to me, "That is well; you may go," his eyes beamed with pleasure.
I returned at once to the schoolroom to wait for my father.
Nearly all were still there.
I sat down beside Garrone.
I was not at all cheerful; I was thinking that it was the last time that we should be near each other for an hour.
I had not yet told Garrone that I should not go through the fourth grade with him, that I was to leave Turin with my father.
He knew nothing.
And he sat there, doubled up together, with his big head reclining on the desk, making ornaments round the photograph of his father, who was dressed like a machinist, and who is a tall, large man, with a bull neck and a serious, honest look, like himself.
And as he sat thus bent together, with his blouse a little open in front, I saw on his bare and robust breast the gold cross which Nelli's mother had presented to him, when she learned that he protected her son.
But it was necessary to tell him sometime that I was going away.
I said to him:-
"Garrone, my father is going away from Turin this autumn, for good.
He asked me if I were going, also.
I replied that I was."
"You will not go through the fourth grade with us?"
he said to me.
I answered "No."
Then he did not speak to me for a while, but went on with his drawing.
Then, without raising his head, he inquired:
"And shall you remember your comrades of the third grade?"
"Yes," I told him, "all of them; but you more than all the rest.
Who can forget you?"
He looked at me fixedly and seriously, with a gaze that said a thousand things, but he said nothing; he only offered me his left hand, pretending to continue his drawing with the other; and I pressed it between mine, that strong and loyal hand.
At that moment the master entered hastily, with a red face, and said, in a low, quick voice, with a joyful intonation:-
"Good, all is going well now, let the rest come forwards; bravi, boys!
Courage!
I am extremely well satisfied."
And, in order to show us his contentment, and to exhilarate us, as he went out in haste, he made a motion of stumbling and of catching at the wall, to prevent a fall; he whom we had never seen laugh!
The thing appeared so strange, that, instead of laughing, all remained stupefied; all smiled, no one laughed.
Well, I do not know,-that act of childish joy caused both pain and tenderness.
All his reward was that moment of cheerfulness,-it was the compensation for nine months of kindness, patience, and even sorrow!
For that he had toiled so long; for that he had so often gone to give lessons to a sick boy, poor teacher!
That and nothing more was what he demanded of us, in exchange for so much affection and so much care!
And, now, it seems to me that I shall always see him in the performance of that act, when I recall him through many years; and when I have become a man, he will still be alive, and we shall meet, and I will tell him about that deed which touched my heart; and I will give him a kiss on his white head.
Monday, 10th.
At one o'clock we all assembled once more for the last time at the school, to hear the results of the examinations, and to take our little promotion books.
The street was thronged with parents, who had even invaded the big hall, and many had made their way into the class-rooms, thrusting themselves even to the master's desk: in our room they filled the entire space between the wall and the front benches.
There were Garrone's father, Derossi's mother, the blacksmith Precossi, Coretti, Signora Nelli, the vegetable-vender, the father of the little mason, Stardi's father, and many others whom I had never seen; and on all sides a whispering and a hum were audible, that seemed to proceed from the square outside.
The master entered, and a profound silence ensued.
He had the list in his hand, and began to read at once.
"Abatucci, promoted, sixty seventieths.
Archini, promoted, fifty-five seventieths.
"The little mason promoted; Crossi promoted.
Then he read loudly:
"Ernesto Derossi, promoted, seventy seventieths, and the first prize."
All the parents who were there-and they all knew him-said:-
"Bravo, bravo, Derossi!"
And he shook his golden curls, with his easy and beautiful smile, and looked at his mother, who made him a salute with her hand.
Garoffi, Garrone, the Calabrian promoted.
Then three or four sent back; and one of them began to cry because his father, who was at the entrance, made a menacing gesture at him.
But the master said to the father:
"No, sir, excuse me; it is not always the boy's fault; it is often his misfortune.
And that is the case here."
Then he read:-
"Nelli, promoted, sixty-two seventieths."
His mother sent him a kiss from her fan.
Stardi, promoted, with sixty-seven seventieths!
but, at hearing this fine fate, he did not even smile, or remove his fists from his temples.
The last was Votini, who had come very finely dressed and brushed,-promoted.
After reading the last name, the master rose and said:
"Boys, this is the last time that we shall find ourselves assembled together in this room.
We have been together a year, and now we part good friends, do we not?
I am sorry to part from you, my dear boys."
He interrupted himself, then he resumed: "If I have sometimes failed in patience, if sometimes, without intending it, I have been unjust, or too severe, forgive me."
"No, no!"
cried the parents and many of the scholars, "no, master, never!"
"Forgive me," repeated the master, "and think well of me.
Next year you will not be with me; but I shall see you again, and you will always abide in my heart.
Farewell until we meet again, boys!"
So saying, he stepped forward among us, and we all offered him our hands, as we stood up on the seats, and grasped him by the arms, and by the skirts of his coat; many kissed him; fifty voices cried in concert:
"Farewell until we meet again, teacher!-Thanks, teacher!-May your health be good!-Remember us!"
When I went out, I felt oppressed by the commotion.
We all ran out confusedly.
Boys were emerging from all the other class-rooms also.
There was a great mixing and tumult of boys and parents, bidding the masters and the mistresses good by, and exchanging greetings among themselves.
The mistress with the red feather had four or five children on top of her, and twenty around her, depriving her of breath; and they had half torn off the little nun's bonnet, and thrust a dozen bunches of flowers in the button-holes of her black dress, and in her pockets.
Many were making much of Robetti, who had that day, for the first time, abandoned his crutches.
On all sides the words were audible:
"Good by until next year! Until the twentieth of October!"
We greeted each other, too.
Ah!
now all disagreements were forgotten at that moment!
Votini, who had always been so jealous of Derossi, was the first to throw himself on him with open arms.
I saluted the little mason, and kissed him, just at the moment when he was making me his last hare's face, dear boy!
I saluted Precossi.
I saluted Garoffi, who announced to me the approach of his last lottery, and gave me a little paper weight of majolica, with a broken corner; I said farewell to all the others.
It was beautiful to see poor Nelli clinging to Garrone, so that he could not be taken from him.
All thronged around Garrone, and it was, "Farewell, Garrone!-Good by until we meet!"
And they touched him, and pressed his hands, and made much of him, that brave, sainted boy; and his father was perfectly amazed, as he looked on and smiled.
Garrone was the last one whom I embraced in the street, and I stifled a sob against his breast: he kissed my brow.
Then I ran to my father and mother.
My father asked me: "Have you spoken to all of your comrades?"
I replied that I had.
"If there is any one of them whom you have wronged, go and ask his pardon, and beg him to forget it.
Is there no one?"
"No one," I answered.
"Farewell, then," said my father with a voice full of emotion, bestowing a last glance on the schoolhouse.
And my mother repeated: "Farewell!"
And I could not say anything.