The European Renaissance was more than an era of new ideals.
It was the end of a struggle to survive in the Middle Ages.
Plague, war, and famine had weakened the region for centuries.
By the late 14th century, Europe had recovered sufficiently to be in a position to move forward, artistically and otherwise.
Changing political, religious, and social thought was reflected in the artwork of the 15th and 16th centuries.
While borrowing heavily from ancient Western civilizations, Renaissance art also was unique in its realism, use of technique, and enduring beauty.
The major artists of the time are considered masters because their work was and continues to be admired, revered, studied, and copied to this day.
Painters of the Renaissance explores progress in the art world at this time, as well as the artists who moved the craft forward.
For all intents and purposes, the period of artistic rebirth that scholars have named the Renaissance began in Italy, spreading across the continent over time.
Paintings had a decidedly humanistic bent.
Portraits of common (versus noble) individuals and the towns and villages in which they resided became the focus of the art world.
Artists themselves were no longer considered mere craftsmen, but intellectual, creative technicians who were known by name.
The defining boundaries of Renaissance art vary from region to region, but the era is sometimes divided into three periods: early (1420-95); High, or classic (1495-1520) and Late, or Mannerist (1520-1600).
Artists of the Early Renaissance, centred chiefly in Florence, Italy, were unified by their humanist approach, although they employed a variety of styles.
Even paintings with religious subject matter were grounded in earthly terms; they highlighted the humanity of figures within a sacred scene rather than presenting static or remote objects of worship.
The paintings of Fra (Brother) Angelico, the Dominican friar who is credited with initiating the genre of painting known as sacra conversazione - Mary and the Christ Child with saints (and sometimes donors) surrounding, depicted in a single panel of an altarpiece as if in conversation - serve as an example of the humanist touch pervading early Renaissance devotional works.
Thanks largely to the writings of Italian architect Filippo Brunelleschi (1377-1446), the use of perspective, wherein an artist incorporates linear convergence to provide the illusion of depth and distance, as well as spatial relationships between objects in a painting, was on the rise at this time.
By manipulating light and shadow, and employing geometric lines and set proportions, the artist could draw the viewer’s eye in a specific direction, and create something of a three-dimensional effect.
Paolo Uccello was an especially adroit practitioner of perspective, but some of his most famous pieces, including Battle of San Romano, also incorporate multiple perspectives, rather than the single, linear perspective popular with other artists of the time.
Masaccio, who is considered the father of Renaissance painting, pioneered the use of one-point perspective to make works such as The Trinity appear three-dimensional, and thus extremely realistic.
Masaccio’s career was brief - covering a span of time from his entrance in a painter’s guild at 21 until his death six years later - but his works are, in many ways, the epitome of early Renaissance art, with their emphasis on simplicity and humanism.
His impact was felt during his lifetime and on through the mid-15th century.
Madonna and Child by Fra Filippo Lippi, a contemporary of Masaccio, shows the influence of the latter artist in the sculptural quality of its figures.
Piero della Francesca, a younger painter, incorporates the styles of Masaccio and Fra Angelico in his works, with the added touch of a unique light colour palette all his own.
Later in the 15th century, artists began to incorporate more movement in their works through depictions of detailed musculature and flowing fabric.
<Caption> Self-portrait by Sofonisba Anguissola, shown at work.
The Bridgeman Art Library/Getty Images
These new artistic ideals spread throughout Italy during the early Renaissance period; other cities began to rival Florence in artistic achievement.
Andrea Mantegna borrowed spatial concepts from the Florentines, but put his unique stamp on his frescoes by lowering the perspective lines, an innovation that gave his figures a certain monumentality and increased the illusion of height.
Mantegna’s early years in Padua, a university town that hosted scholars from across Europe, heightened his interest in all things classical, which was reflected in his art.
His brother-in-law, Giovanni Bellini, combined the influence of Mantagna with that of others, including his father, Jacopo, letting his media dictate the approach to each piece.
His change from tempera to oil paint, which gave him a greater ability to experiment with shading, allowed him to refine his depiction of the fall of natural light and to create a particular mood.
His was one of a number of experimental styles of the early Renaissance that had coalesced by the end of the 15th century.
The paintings produced during the High Renaissance period are noted for their calm, harmonious style.
The masters of this period include Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Raphael.
Among the many accomplishments of Leonardo da Vinci, who embodies the concept of the “Renaissance man”in his breadth of thought and activities, was his work as a painter.
Da Vinci spent most of the end of the early period in the service of Ludovico Sforza, the duke of Milan.
While employed as the duke’s painter and engineer, da Vinci painted with oils, which (as noted also in the work of Mantagna) are slow to dry and thus allow for a great deal of manipulation.
This characteristic of oil paints allowed him to employ subtle shading, or sfumato, and his vast knowledge of engineering translated into an explicit feeling of movement in his works.
His famous work The Last Supper is a masterful example of the use of perspective, which was used to highlight Christ as the focal point of the piece despite the activity and drama swirling around him.
Upon returning to his native Florence, da Vinci continued to create works that inspired other artists - including his most recognizable portrait, the Mona Lisa - and changed the art form of painting itself.
Michelangelo Buonarroti, then in the early years of his career, was also present during the first decades of the 16th century.
During that period, however, he worked primarily as a sculptor, creating such lasting works as the Madonna della Pieta and David.
Then he was called to Rome by Pope Julius II to paint the spectacular ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.
Working under duress, he created the 10,000-square-foot masterpiece with minimal assistance; others laid the plaster and mixed the paint, but his hand alone painted the biblical scenes.
Raphael learned from da Vinci and Michelangelo during his years in Florence, immersing himself in their style and becoming a master in his own right while living and working in Rome.
He is perhaps best known for his calm, idealized Madonnas, which were patterned after da Vinci’s Virgin of the Rocks.
Raphael borrowed stylistically from the Mona Lisa and several sculptures by Michelangelo.
Meanwhile, in Venice, Giorgione was painting textured landscapes, calling to the foreground scenes of pastoral splendour that had mostly functioned as decorative background.
Giorgione’s painting The Tempest, a dramatic depiction of an impending storm, contains only three figures, its focus being chiefly on the drama inherent in the natural setting.
His career was brief, spanning only five years, cut short by his sudden death.
His artistic successor, Titian, continued in the Venetian style of saturated colour and varied texture in subjects both religious and mythological.
Titian’s later works are more distinctly sensual, as seen in his Venus of Urbino and in what many consider to be his masterpiece, the Assumption.
In turn, artists such as Tintoretto and Veronese carried forward Titian’s themes and techniques.
By 1520 the ubiquity of the High style had worn thin for some artists.
They rejected the pleasing, calm, emotional paintings of the earlier period and countered with a style that is now known as Mannerism.
While classical pieces were marked by beauty, balance, and expressive subject matter, Mannerist paintings favoured the dramatic.
They hewed more to style than substance.
The figures in portraits were presented in convoluted and contrived poses.
Many Florentine Mannerist painters, such as Jacopo da Pantormo and Rosso Fiorentino, purposefully injected visual disharmony into their works as a means of expressing unrest and instilling a sense of confusion.
Even some of the greatest classical painters, such as Titian and Michelangelo, began to embrace elements of this style toward the end of their careers.
Roman Mannerists were not as bold in their rebellion as their Florentine counterparts.
Their works, though still unusual by classic standards, had harmonious elements as well.
Known principally for portraiture, Parmigianino experimented with spatial relationships, distorting his subjects by elongating their limbs and necks yet still imbuing them with a beauty that transcended their disproportionate features.
In his Glorification of S. Rocco, the Venetian painter Tintoretto paid homage to High Renaissance sensibilities, even as he made little effort to smooth his lines or hide his brushstrokes, in Mannerist fashion.
By the end of the 16th century, Mannerism faltered because it failed to engage the general public, particularly patrons inside the church.
Among the noteworthy post-Mannerist artists of the late Renaissance are Paolo Veronese, a master of large scenes with numerous figures, and Sofonisba Anguissola, a portraitist and one of the first women painters.
There can be no mistaking the primacy of Italy as the birthplace of Renaissance art.
Yet while Italy was the epicenter of Renaissance art, the approach seen in Italy spread to other regions of Europe as well.
Many northern artists were influenced by spending time among the Italian masters.
One case in point is that of German painter Albrecht Dürer, who traveled to Italy during the height of the Renaissance and returned to Germany with an evident appreciation of the humanist methodologies.
His work became increasingly classical as his interactions with Italian artists grew over time.
Dürer’s work continued to influence artists of his homeland throughout the Renaissance, long after his death in 1528.
The journeys to Italy of Flemish painter Pieter Bruegel the Elder did not influence his technique so much as his subject matter.
He is credited with introducing landscape painting to his homeland.
Famed Spanish artist El Greco studied in Italy and returned to his homeland to create works in the Mannerist and Venetian styles.
But the exchange was not one-sided.
Italian painters also traveled and absorbed new ideas while disseminating their own newfound perspectives.
It is important to note that the Northern Renaissance painters were not simply artistic sponges, absorbing notions and techniques from the masters of Italy.
They also contributed many ideas and techniques that advanced the art of painting.
Robert Campin, for example, pioneered the movement away from decorative painting, as well as introducing common objects as subject matter.
Another Flemish painter and a student of Campin’s, Rogier van der Weyden facilitated an exchange of technique and ideals between the Flemish and Italian schools during a visit to Italy in the 1450s.
Jan van Eyck, who in his early years illustrated or “illuminated”manuscripts, refined the new medium of oil painting in the first half of the 15th century.
His work was naturalistic and highlighted the hand of God in earthly things, both natural and man-made.
Other events and intellectual movements also had an impact on the artists of the Northern Renaissance.
The Protestant Reformation of the 16th century notably altered the subject matter for some Northern artists.
Lucas Cranach the Elder, a friend of reformer Martin Luther, accepted commissions from both Protestants and Catholics.
Hans Holbein the Younger struggled early in his career with his religious allegiances and eventually chose to give up sacred subjects altogether when he was in his early 30s.
The Renaissance in Europe was both revolutionary and reactionary.
Like their counterparts in other fields of interest, artists of the Renaissance looked to the principles of the ancient Greeks and Romans, applying new techniques and media to the presentation of notions of humanity and nature that were recognizable in an earlier era.
As a result, the works of the best Renaissance painters have endured over the centuries not only because they show mastery of painterly skills, but also because of their deep engagement with the idea of the artist as a remaker of culture.
Their work is accessible because they painted the natural world and humans engaged in human activity, and viewers recognize themselves in these paintings.
But Renaissance paintings remain touchstones in the modern world because they are more than beautiful representations.
They embody the first real recognition of human potential.
ART AND THE RENAISSANCE
The term Renaissance was first used by French art historians of the late 18th century in reference to the reappearance of antique architectural forms on Italian buildings of the early 16th century.
The term was later expanded to include the whole of the 15th and 16th centuries and, by extension, to include sculpture, painting, and the decorative arts.
There is still considerable disagreement among art historians as to whether the term should be restricted to a phenomenon that had its origins in Italy and then spread through western Europe (the point of view taken here) or whether directly contemporary developments north of the Alps, and especially in the Low Countries, should be included on an equal footing with what was happening in Italy.
The time span of the Renaissance is generally accepted as the period from roughly 1400 to about 1600, although certain geographical areas and certain art forms require greater latitude.
This period is sometimes characterized as a rebirth or, better, the birth of attitudes and aims that have their closest parallel in the art of classical antiquity.
Classical literature and, less often, classical painting were invoked as a justification for these new aims.
The theoretical writings on art from the period indicate that humanity was the dominant theme.
In religious painting, drama and emotion are expressed in human terms.
From the late Middle Ages the theme of the Madonna enthroned with Christ Child is presented in an earthly setting peopled by mortals.
This strongly humanistic trend serves to explain, at least in part, the development of portraiture as an independent genre and the ever-increasing number of profane, usually classical mythological, subjects in the art of the Renaissance.
The painting of landscapes, as the earthly setting of human activity, has its first modest beginnings in this period.
For the sake of convenience, painting of the Renaissance is divided into three periods, although there is considerable overlap depending upon the painter and the place.
The early Renaissance is reckoned to cover the period from about 1420 to 1495.
The High Renaissance, or classic phase, is generally considered to extend from 1495 to 1520, the death of Raphael.
The period of Mannerism and what has come to be called Late Renaissance painting is considered to extend from the 1520s to approximately 1600.
THE EARLY RENAISSANCE IN ITALY
The early Renaissance in Italy was essentially an experimental period characterized by the styles of individual artists rather than by any all-encompassing stylistic trend as in the High Renaissance or Mannerism.
Early Renaissance painting in Italy had its birth and development in Florence, from which it spread to such centres as Urbino, Ferrara, Padua, Mantua, Venice, and Milan after the middle of the century.
The political and economic climate of the Italian Renaissance was often unstable; Florence, however, did at least provide an intellectual and cultural environment that was extremely propitious for the development of art.
Although the direct impact of humanist literary studies upon 15th-century painting has generally been denied, three writers of the 15th century (Leon Battista Alberti, Filarete, and Enea Silvio Piccolomini, later Pope Pius II) drew parallels between the rebirth of classical learning and the rebirth of art.
The literature of antiquity revealed that in earlier times both works of art and artists had been appreciated for their own intrinsic merits.
Humanist studies also fostered a tendency, already apparent in Florentine painting as early as the time of Giotto, to see the world and everything in it in human terms.
In the early 15th century Masaccio emphasized the human drama and emotions in his painting The Expulsion rather than the theological implications of the act portrayed.
Masaccio in his Trinity and Fra Angelico in his San Marco Altarpiece seem to be much more concerned with the human relations between the figures in the composition than with the purely devotional aspects of the subject.
In the same way, the painter became more and more concerned with the relations between the work of art and the observer.
<Caption> Detail of a fresco by 15th-century artist Cosimo Rosselli.
Early Renaissance painters tended to focus on human emotion and interaction.
DEA/G.Nimatallah/De Agostini/Getty Images
This latter aspect of early 15th-century Florentine painting relies in great part on the invention of the one-point perspective system, which derives in turn from the new learning and the new vision of the world.
The empirical system of perspective enabled the artist to make all parts of the painting bear a rational relation to each other and to the observer, for the observer’s height and the distance he is to stand from the painting were controlled by the artist in the construction of perspective.
By means of this system the microcosm of the painting and the real world of the observer become visually one, and observers participate, as it were, in what they observe.
To heighten the illusion of a painting as a window on the world, the Italian artists of the early 15th century turned to a study of the effects of light in nature and how to represent them in a painting, a study of the anatomy and human proportions, and a careful observation of the world about them.
It is primarily these characteristics that separate early Renaissance painting from late medieval painting in Italy.
THE FOUNDER OF RENAISSANCE PAINTING: MASACCIO
Masaccio has rightly been called the father of Renaissance painting, for every major artist of the 15th and 16th centuries in Florence began his career by studying Masaccio’s murals in fresco.
Masaccio is the artistic heir of Giotto, yet there is no indication of direct borrowing from the older master.
He was also a friend of Brunelleschi and from him may have learned perspective and the concept of a clear and rationally articulated space.
He was a friend, too, of the Florentine sculptor Donatello and may have learned from him the effectiveness of simple drapery folds over a full and powerful figure.
Whatever his artistic sources, Masaccio’s extant work reveals a concern with large and simple figures clad in simple draperies.
He was concerned with light and the way it gives the illusion of solidity to the painted figure.
He created a deep and clearly articulated space in his paintings, and he was above all concerned with his actors as humans carrying out some purposeful human activity.
PERSPECTIVE
The theory of linear perspective was the brainchild of the Florentine architect-engineers Filippo Brunelleschi (1377–1446) and Leon Battista Alberti (1404–72) and their followers.
Their scheme was derived from Westernized versions of the optical studies of the Arab mathematician and astronomer Ibn al-Haytham (c. 965–1040, also called Alhazen).
It was based on the notion of the vanishing point, a concept known to Greeks and Romans that had been lost.
Masaccio’s application of the principles laid out by Brunelleschi revolutionized the art of painting.
In his seminal Della pittura (1436; On Painting), Alberti codified, especially for painters, much of the practical work on the subject that had been carried out by earlier artists.
He formulated, for example, the idea that “vision makes a triangle, and from this it is clear that a very distant quantity seems no larger than a point.”
Alberti directed the reader to imagine that a painter studies a scene through a window, using only one eye and not moving his head.
The painter cannot know whether he looks at an external scene or at a glass painted to present to the eye the same visual pyramid.
Supposing this decorated window to be the canvas, Alberti interpreted the painting-to-be as the projection of the scene in life onto a vertical plane cutting the visual pyramid.
A distinctive feature of his system was the “point at infinity” at which parallel lines in the painting appear to converge.
Alberti’s procedure, as developed by Piero della Francesca and Albrecht Dürer, was used by many artists who wished to render perspective persuasively.
And not just painters, but by cartographers who tried various projections of the sphere to accommodate the record of geographical discoveries that began in the mid-15th century with Portuguese exploration of the west coast of Africa.
The only extant work by Masaccio that can be clearly dated is the Pisa altarpiece of 1426 (the central panel depicting the Madonna enthroned with Christ Child and angels).
Although Masaccio continued the medieval tradition of using a gold background, the architectural elements of the throne indicate his awareness of the influence of Roman antiquity on the architecture of his friend Brunelleschi.
The Madonna is no longer an elegant queen of heaven but an earthly mother with a human child on her lap.
The figure of the Christ Child is a clear demonstration for future generations of the way light and shade can be manipulated in a painting to give the illusion of a solid three-dimensional body.
In this painting Masaccio laid the foundations for one major current in all Florentine painting.
His concern with the sculpturally conceived figure, bathed in light and presented in a strong and simple manner, created a work of quiet dignity and great monumentality in that it appears to be larger than it really is.
The Trinity in Santa Maria Novella, Florence, provides a summary of Masaccio’s brief career and indeed of the aesthetic principles of early Renaissance painting generally.
The simple sculptural figures have acquired even greater dignity.
The drama and emotion are presented in touching human terms as the Madonna turns to the observer to point out her crucified Son.
In addition to the use of light to unite the space of the painting with the space of the observer, Masaccio also employed what appears to be the earliest practical example of the one-point perspective system, later to be formulated in words by Alberti.
All the highest aims of early Renaissance painting are here: simplicity, strength, monumentality; human beings as observers, as actors, and as participants in the works of art.
<Caption> Masaccio’s Trinity, painted on a wall of the Church of Santa Maria Novella in Florence.
The use of one-point perspective provides the illusion of three-dimensional depth to the painting.
Alinari Archives/Getty images
FLORENTINE PAINTERS OF THE MID-15TH CENTURY
Masaccio had no true followers or successors of equal stature, though there was a group of other Florentine painters who were about the same age as Masaccio and who followed in his footsteps to a greater or lesser degree: Fra Filippo Lippi, Fra Angelico, and Paolo Uccello.
Fra Filippo Lippi was a Carmelite monk who was daily exposed to Masaccio’s work.
Lippi’s earliest datable work, the Madonna and Child (1437), relies on the Madonna from the Pisa altarpiece, but in his depiction of the Christ Child he already reveals an earthiness and sweetness unlike anything by Masaccio.
The Madonna and Child with Two Angels - with its urchin-angels, lumpy Christ Child, and elegant Madonna - is perhaps one of his best-known late works.
The placement of the Madonna before an open window is one of the key sources for later Renaissance portraiture, including Leonardo da Vinci’s Mona Lisa, while the elegance and sweetness of the Madonna were to have their greatest reflection in the work of Lippi’s student, Botticelli.
Born about the same time as Masaccio, Fra Angelico was a Dominican monk who lived at Fiesole (just outside Florence) and at San Marco in Florence.
His earliest documented work, the Linaiuoli Altarpiece of 1433, continues much that is traditional to medieval art, although the male saints in the wings (side pieces of a composite painting, typically a tripartite altarpiece) already reveal the influence of Masaccio.
The altarpiece that he executed between 1438 and 1440 for the high altar of San Marco is one of the landmarks of early Renaissance art.
It is the first appearance in Florence of the sacra conversazione, a composition in which angels, saints, and sometimes donors occupy the same space as the Madonna and Christ Child and in which the figures seem to be engaged in conversation.
In addition to inaugurating a new phase of religious painting, the altarpiece reveals the influence of Masaccio in the sculptural treatment of the figures and an accurate awareness of the perspective theories of painting expressed by Alberti in his treatise.
At about the same date, Fra Angelico was commissioned to decorate the monks’ cells in San Marco.
The nature of the commission - traditional devotional images whose execution required assistants - apparently turned Fra Angelico toward the religious and didactic works that characterize the end of his career; e.g., the Chapel of Nicholas V in the Vatican.
Paolo Uccello’s reputation as a practitioner of perspective is such that his truly remarkable gifts as a decorator tend to be overlooked.
Studies of his extant works suggest that he was more interested in medieval optics than in the rational perspective system of Alberti and Brunelleschi.
His earliest documented work, the Sir John Hawkwood fresco of 1436 in Florence cathedral, is a decorative work of a very high order and one that respects the integrity of the wall to which it is attached.
Uccello is perhaps best known for the three panels depicting The Battle of San Romano, executed about 1456 for the Medici Palace.
The paintings were designed as wall decoration and as such resemble tapestries: Uccello is concerned only with creating a small boxlike space for the action, for he closes off the background with a tapestry-like interweaving of men and animals.
His primary concern is with the rhythmic disposition of the elements of the composition across the surface, an emphasis that he reinforces with the repetition of arcs and circles.
Uccello’s concern with the decorative and linear properties of painting had a great impact on the cassone (chest) painters of Florence and found its greatest reflection and refinement in the work of Botticelli.
Masaccio’s greatest impact can be seen in the works of three younger painters, Andrea del Castagno, Domenico Veneziano, and Piero della Francesca.
Castagno was the leader of the group.
His Last Supper of about 1445, in the former convent of Sant’Apollonia in Florence, reveals the influence of Masaccio in the sculptural treatment of the figures, the painter’s concern with light, and his desire to create a credible and rationally conceived space.
At the same time Castagno betrays an almost pedantic interest in antiquity, which roughly parallels a similar development in letters, by the use of fictive marble panels on the rear wall and of sphinxes for the bench ends, both of which are direct copies of Roman prototypes.
In the last years of his life, Castagno’s style changed abruptly; he adopted a highly expressive emotionalism that paralleled a similar development in the work of his contemporaries.
His The Trinity with Saints in the church of the Santissima Annunziata, Florence, was originally planned with calm and balanced figures, as the underpainting reveals.
In the final painting, however, the figures, though sculpturally conceived, project an agitation heightened by the emaciated figure of St. Jerome and the radically conceived figure of the crucified Christ.
The optimism, rationality, and calm human drama of earlier Renaissance painting in Florence were beginning to give way to a more personal, expressive, and linear style.
One aspect of this new direction is met in the work of the enigmatic Domenico Veneziano, the second of the three principal painters who looked to Masaccio.
His name indicates that he was a Venetian, and it is known that he arrived in Florence about 1438.
He was associated with Castagno, and perhaps Fra Angelico, and helped to train the somewhat younger Piero della Francesca.
His St. Lucy Altarpiece of about 1445–50 is an example of the sacra conversazione genre and contains references to the painting of Masaccio and the early 15th-century sculpture of the Florentine Nanni di Banco.
The colour, however, is Domenico’s own and has no relation to the Florentine tradition.
His juxtaposition of pinks and light greens and his generally blond tonality point rather to his Venetian origins.
In the painting he has lowered the vanishing point in order to make the figures appear to tower over the observer, with the result that the monumentality of the painting is enhanced at the expense of the observer’s sense of participating in the painting.
Piero della Francesca received his early training in Florence but spent the active part of his career elsewhere.
His Flagellation of Christ (late 1450s) is a summary of early 15th-century interest in mathematics, perspective, and proportion.
The calm sculptural figures are placed in clear, rational space and bathed in a cool light.
This gives them a monumental dignity that can only be compared to early 5th-century-BCE Greek sculpture.
Much the same tendency can be seen in Piero’s great fresco cycle in the church of San Francesco in Arezzo.
LATE 15TH-CENTURY FLORENTINE PAINTERS
A hiatus occurred in Florentine painting around 1465–75.
All the older artists had died, and the men who were to dominate the second half of the century were too young to have had prolonged contact with them.
Three of these younger artists, Antonio Pollaiuolo, Sandro Botticelli, and Andrea del Verrocchio, began their careers as goldsmiths, which perhaps explains the linear emphasis and sense of movement noticeable in Florentine painting of the later 15th century.
As well as being a goldsmith, Antonio Pollaiuolo was a painter, sculptor, engraver, and architect.
His work indicates his fascination with muscles in action, and he is said to have been the first artist to dissect the human body.
In the altarpiece The Martyrdom of St. Sebastian (1475) he presents the archers from two points of view to demonstrate their muscular activity.
His painting Hercules and Antaeus, like the engraving of The Battle of the Nudes, depicts struggle and violent action.
The Rape of Deianira emphasizes yet another new element in Florentine painting, the landscape setting, in this case a lovely portrait of the Arno Valley with the city of Florence in the background.
A similar concern with moving figures, a sense of movement across the surface of the panel, and landscape is found in the earlier works of Sandro Botticelli.
In his well-known painting The Primavera he uses line in depicting hair, flowing draperies, or the contour of an arm to suggest the movement of the figures.
At the same time the pose and gesture of the figures set up a rising and falling linear movement across the surface of the painting.
Botticelli’s well-known paintings of the Madonna and Child reveal a sweetness that he may have learned from Fra Filippo Lippi, together with his own sense of elegance and grace.
A certain nervosity and pessimistic introspection inherent in Botticelli’s early works broke forth about 1490.
His Mystic Nativity of 1501 is even, in one sense, a denial of all that the Renaissance stood for.
The ambiguities of space and proportion are directed toward the unprecedented creation of a highly personal and emotionally charged statement.
Florentine painters active in the closing decades of the 15th century include Filippino Lippi, who was apparently apprenticed to Botticelli when his father, Fra Filippo Lippi, died.
He painted a group of madonnas that are easily confused with Botticelli’s early work.
By 1485, however, he had developed a somewhat nervous and agitated style that can be seen in the highly expressive Vision of St. Bernard.
His last works, such as the series of frescoes he painted in Santa Maria Novella (1502), reveal a use of colour and distortion of form that may have influenced the later development of Mannerism in Florence a generation or so later.
Another painter active at this time was Domenico Ghirlandaio, whose artistic career was spent as a reporter of the Florentine scene.
The series of frescoes on the Life of the Virgin in Santa Maria Novella (finished 1490) can be viewed as the life of a young Florentine girl as well as a religious painting.
His art was already old-fashioned in his own time, but he provided a large number of Florentine artists, among them Michelangelo, with training in the difficult art of fresco painting.
DIFFUSION OF THE INNOVATIONS OF THE FLORENTINE SCHOOL
The discoveries and innovations of the early 15th century in Florence began to diffuse to other artistic centres by mid-century.
Siena painters in general continued the traditions of the 14th century except for such artists as Matteo di Giovanni, Neroccio di Bartolomeo, and Vecchietta, who alone in that city were to a certain degree under Florentine influence.
In Ferrara, Cosimo Tura, Francesco del Cossa, and Ercole de’ Roberti felt the influence of Florence as transmitted by Piero della Francesca.
Only in Padua and Venice, however, did painters arise who could actually challenge the preeminence of Florence.
Andrea Mantegna was one of those whose work grew out of the traditions of Florence, traditions to which Mantegna gave his own special stamp, however.
His space is like that devised by the Florentines except that he lowers the horizon line to give his figures greater monumentality.
His sculptural and often stony figures descend from Donatello and from ancient Roman models.
By 1460 Mantegna had moved to Mantua, where he became court painter for the Gonzaga family.
The Bellini family of Venice forms one of the great dynasties in painting.
The father, Jacopo, who had been a student of Gentile da Fabriano, adopted a style that owed something to both that prevailing in the Low Countries and that in Italy.
A daughter of Jacopo’s was married to Mantegna, and the two sons - Gentile and, more especially, Giovanni Bellini - dominated Venetian painting until the first decade of the 16th century.
Gentile followed more closely in his father’s footsteps and is perhaps best known for his portraits of doges and sultans of Constantinople and his large paintings of Venetian religious processions.
Giovanni early fell under the influence of Mantegna.
At an unknown point in his career, Giovanni was in addition introduced to Flemish painting.
These different influences permitted him about 1480 to evolve a highly personal style that greatly influenced the work of subsequent Venetian painters.
This style consists above all of a softly diffused Venetian light that can only be achieved in an oil medium.
Giovanni’s work in the traditional medium for painting on panels - egg tempera - retains the crispness of contour and tightness of composition that the medium seems to require.
The oil paintings, however, emphasize by their use of light the textures of the objects represented, softening the outlines and creating an elegiac mood.
Giovanni’s greatest innovation is the way in which the soft light suffuses the entire space, an effect particularly remarkable where it strikes the golden half dome of the apse and the ample draperies of the figures, which seem almost palpable.
The Enthroned Madonna from San Giobbe of about the same date goes even further in defining a composition and a way of painting that endured in Venice for centuries.
The painting of St. Francis in Ecstasy (c. 1480) adds yet another dimension to Giovanni’s art.
The observer’s eye tends to wander from the saint and his cell into the distant landscape, for Giovanni was one of the greatest 15th-century masters of landscape painting.
Figures, animals, trees, and buildings provide a series of guideposts leading the eye back into space.
Giovanni influenced several Venetian painters: Lorenzo Lotto and Vittore Carpaccio and also, more importantly, Giorgione and Titian.
THE TRANSFORMATIONS OF LEONARDO DA VINCI
The richness, the variety, and even the inherent contradictions of 15th-century Florentine painting are both embodied and transformed in the art and the person of the multifaceted genius Leonardo da Vinci.
Although he devoted a great deal of his career to a theoretical treatise on the art of painting, he was above all interested in the appearance of things and in the way they operated.
This curiosity led him to a study of the flight of birds, the movement of water, the features of the land, the mechanical advantage obtainable in gears and gear trains, the growth of plants, the human anatomy, and many other things.
His consummate skill as a draftsman made it possible for him to record these discoveries as no one before him had done.
All the knowledge that he gained was directed toward enriching his art, for Leonardo thought of himself primarily as a painter.
<Caption> The Virgin of the Rocks, by Leonardo da Vinci, completed 1508; in the National Gallery, London.
The Bridgeman Art Library/Getty Images
As a youth Leonardo was apprenticed to Verrocchio, in whose shop he learned to draw, prepare and mix colours, and paint.
Leonardo’s genius is already apparent in his collaboration with Verrocchio in the Baptism of Christ (c. 1474–75), in which his contributions to the landscape and his figure of an angel clearly reveal his superiority.
In 1481 Leonardo wrote a famous letter to the duke of Milan offering his services.
The offer was accepted, and for the next 18 years he remained in Milan, where he executed a number of paintings and innumerable drawings, worked on a number of other projects, and wrote extensively.
The Virgin of the Rocks, painted in Milan about 1483, stands at the threshold of the High Renaissance.
In this painting Leonardo introduced the pyramidal composition that was to become a hallmark of the High Renaissance.
The placement of the Madonna, the Christ Child, the young St. John the Baptist, and the angel creates a movement that the eye willingly follows, yet the movement is contained within the implied pyramid, giving a sense of stability and calm grandeur to the composition.
The mysterious landscape that surrounds them implies adequate space in which the figures can exist and move and an extension into depth that the eye cannot follow.
The light that falls on the figures delicately models them in a subtle juxtaposition of light and shade.
The contours of the figures seem to dissolve into the background, and the light seems to flow gently over a surface.
The subtle and delicate modeling and the use of shading rather than line to delineate form and figure are known as sfumato and were much imitated, but what was more important and eventually more influential was Leonardo’s use of light and shade as a unifying compositional factor.
This was unprecedented in painting.
It was achieved by the tonal continuity of the shadows - a tonal continuity conditional upon a severe restriction of local colour.
SFUMATO
The word sfumato comes from the Italian word sfumare, meaning “to tone down” or “to evaporate like smoke.”
In reference to painting or drawing, sfumato is the fine shading that produces soft, imperceptible transitions between colours and tones.
It is used most often to describe the work of Leonardo da Vinci and his followers, who made subtle gradations, without lines or borders, from light to dark areas.
The technique was used for a highly illusionistic rendering of facial features and for atmospheric effects.
It is related to the term chiaroscuro, which concerns the play of light and shadow as they define three-dimensional objects.
These effects, as well as the softly diffused light characteristic of Venetian painting, were only possible in the oil medium, which, because of its lengthy drying period, enables all parts of a painting to be advanced and adjusted together and the transparent glazes of which make possible unity of atmosphere and chiaroscuro.
The rich effects of impasto (deliberately rough and thick paint textures) were also made possible in oil and were particularly exploited in Venice, where the use of canvas as a support first became truly popular.
But there is no doubt that oil painting is a technique that originated in the Low Countries.
Leonardo’s attempts to transfer this new concept of painting to the difficult genre of murals led to the triumph and the tragedy of The Last Supper.
Because the traditional technique of fresco painting was too final for Leonardo’s method of working, he invented a new technique - still not fully understood - that permitted him to revise in the manner of oil painting.
The technique was not permanent, and the painting began to deteriorate in Leonardo’s own lifetime.
Despite this, the painting stands as one of the greatest human achievements.
All elements of the painting lead the eye to the calm and pyramidal figure of Christ.
The room is depicted according to the rules of perspective, with all the direction implied by the lines of the architecture meeting at the vanishing point in the head of Christ.
In this painting Leonardo has combined the sense of drama of the groups of disturbed apostles, the sculptural figure of Christ, and the rationally constructed space of the first half of the 15th century with the movement and emotion of the second half, achieving a new synthesis that goes far beyond anything his predecessors had dreamed was possible.
Leonardo’s The Last Supper marks the actual beginning of the High Renaissance in Italy.
HIGH AND LATE RENAISSANCE
In painting, the style called High Renaissance is, in a sense, the culmination of the experiments of the 15th century, for it is above all characterized by a desire to achieve harmony and balance.
Movement is important and necessary, yet the eye is always given a point of focus and rest.
The composition is self-contained and conforms to Renaissance art theorist Leon Battista Alberti’s definition of beauty as “that harmony of parts to which nothing can be added or taken away without destroying the whole.”
Although there is movement implied in the poses of the figures and movement across the surface of the composition, it is always dignified movement, giving the impression of calm.
The style exhibits variety and richness, yet maintains simplicity and unity.
It is never as self-conscious as 15th-century painting had been, nor is it as laboured as much of Mannerist painting.
It is frequently compared to Greek art of the 5th century BCE for its calm and monumentality.
<Caption> Marriage of St. Catherine, oil on panel by Andrea del Sarto, 1512–13; in the Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister, Dresden, Ger.
Sachsische Landesbibliothek/Abteilung Deutsche Fotothek/A. Rous
<Caption> The Holy Family, oil on panel transferred to hardboard, by Giorgione, c. 1500; in the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. Courtesy of the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., Samuel H. Kress Collection.
The form’s greatest practitioners were the Florentines Leonardo da Vinci (although da Vinci’s earlier work is usually assigned to the early Renaissance) and Michelangelo, the Urbino-born Raphael, and the Venetian Titian.
Other artists, such as Andrea del Sarto and Fra Bartolommeo in Florence, Correggio in Parma, and Giovanni Bellini and Giorgione in Venice, were more or less attracted to the style at some point in their careers.
ITALIAN RENAISSANCE MASTERS
The new style of painting that da Vinci had invented in Milan was continued with modifications by Bernardino Luini and others.
It had no immediate repercussions in his native Florence, although the example of his unfinished Adoration remained there.
It is true that Botticelli, Ghirlandaio, and Filippino Lippi borrowed the broad outlines of the composition, but they did not fully comprehend the innovational features inherent in it.
The full impact of da Vinci’s art was felt only upon his return to Florence in 1500.
Crowds flocked to the church of the Santissima Annunziata to see his cartoon (a full-scale study for a finished painting) of The Virgin and Child with St. Anne.
The great mural of the Battle of Anghiari (1503–06) pitted da Vinci against his rival Michelangelo in a competition to record the history of the city in the seat of city government.
Neither painting was finished.
Yet, despite the inconclusive nature of the works partially executed during his brief Florentine stay, da Vinci left a deep impression on that city.
The Mona Lisa revolutionized portrait painting.
His drawings encouraged fellow artists to make more and freer studies for their paintings and encouraged connoisseurs to collect those drawings.
Through the drawings da Vinci’s Milanese works were made known to the Florentines.
Finally, his reputation and stature as an artist and thinker spread to his fellow artists and assured for them a freedom of action and thought similar to his own.
ENIGMATIC AND INFLUENTIAL
In its exquisite synthesis of sitter and landscape, the Mona Lisa set the standard for all future portraits.
The painting presents a woman revealed in the 21st century to have been Lisa del Giocondo (née Gherardini), the wife of the Florentine merchant Francesco di Bartolomeo del Giocondo (hence the alternative title to the work, La Gioconda).
The picture is a half-body portrait, which has as a backdrop a distant landscape.
Yet this simple description of a seemingly standard composition gives little sense of Leonardo da Vinci’s achievement.
The sensuous curves of the sitter’s hair and clothing, created through sfumato, are echoed in the shapes of the valleys and rivers behind her.
The sense of overall harmony achieved in the painting - especially apparent in the sitter’s faint smile - reflects da Vinci’s idea of the cosmic link connecting humanity and nature and presents an enduring record of da Vinci’s vision.
Preliminary drawings by da Vinci encouraged other artists to make more and freer studies for their paintings and stimulated connoisseurs to collect those drawings.
Through the drawings his Milanese works were made known to the Florentines.
Also, his reputation and stature as an artist and thinker spread to his fellow artists and assured for them a freedom of action and thought similar to his own.
One such painter was the young Raphael, who adopted the Mona Lisa format for his portraits.
It served as a clear model for his Portrait of Maddalena Doni (c. 1506).
The artist even influenced the fashion in which artists dressed their subjects.
In his Treatise on Painting, published long after his death, da Vinc i wrote that art should avoid the fashion:
As far as possible avoid the costumes of your own day.…Costumes of our period should not be depicted unless it be on tombstones, so that we may be spared being laughed at by our successors for the mad fashions of men and leave behind only things that may be admired for their dignity and beauty.
The Mona Lisa demonstrates this aspect of his treatise perfectly in that La Giaconda is dressed in a coloured shift, loosely pleated at the neck, instead of the tight clothes that were then popular.
The painter who benefited most from da Vinci’s example was undoubtedly Raphael.
He was already a successful and respected artist when, at age 21, he went to Florence only to discover that he had much to learn.
His drawing style changed from the tight contours and interior hatching he had learned from Perugino toward the freer, more flowing style of da Vinci.
From da Vinci’s Virgin of the Rocks Raphael evolved a new Madonna type seated in a soft and gentle landscape.
He adopted the Mona Lisa format for his portraits, and he also studied closely the sculpture of Michelangelo.
By 1509, when he departed for Rome, Raphael had assimilated all Florence had to offer and was ready to make his own unique statement.
The Stanza della Segnatura (the first of a series of rooms in the Vatican constituting Pope Julius II’s apartments), particularly the School of Athens, which Raphael painted between 1508 and 1511, is one of the clearest and finest examples of the High Renaissance style.
In the School of Athens Raphael, like da Vinci before him, made a balance between the movement of the figures and the ordered and stable space.
He peopled this space with figures in a rich variety of poses yet controlled poses and gestures to make one group lead to the next in an interweaving and interlocking pattern, bringing the eye to the central figures of Plato and Aristotle at the converging point of the perspective construction.
At about the same time Raphael was working in the papal apartments in the Vatican, Michelangelo had undertaken the formidable task of decorating the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel (1508–12), also for Pope Julius II.
In 1481–82 under Pope Sixtus IV, the uncle of Julius, the chapel had been completed and the walls decorated with frescoes depicting scenes from the life of Moses and the life of Christ executed by Botticelli, Ghirlandaio, Perugino, and others.
Against his will Michelangelo was assigned to paint in fresco scenes from the creation.
Although he had been trained in fresco painting in the shop of Ghirlandaio and although he had already executed a few paintings of considerable power, Michelangelo thought of himself as a sculptor.
The scenes were painted in reverse chronological order, beginning with the Drunkenness of Noah over the door and ending with the act of creation over the altar.
In the first three frescoes Michelangelo seems to be feeling his way.
With the second three - Temptation and Expulsion, Creation of Eve, Creation of Adam - he returns to the models of his youth (Masaccio for the Expulsion and Jacopo della Quercia for the Creation of Eve) to create a powerful High Renaissance composition.
The balance between the kinetic energy of God the Creator with his whirlwind of figures around him and the flaccid lifeless form of Adam comes to a focus in the two hands and the significant void between them.
In the final three scenes of creation, Michelangelo moves beyond his contemporaries to a highly personal statement without parallel in the art of the 16th century.
The Sistine ceiling was recognized as a masterpiece in its own time.
The artist was judged to be a superhuman being and earned the title “the divine Michelangelo.”
Contemporaries spoke of the terribilità, or awesome power, of the frescoes and their creator.
Michelangelo, Leonardo, and Raphael raised the artist and his art to a position of esteem perhaps never enjoyed (or deserved) either before or since.
Certainly their soaring levels of achievement made it difficult for succeeding artists to follow in their footsteps and impossible to surpass them.
Hence, the “anticlassic style,” as it has been called, emerged in their own lifetime - even in some of Raphael’s late works - and provided one of the sources of Mannerism.
By 1513, when Julius II died and Leo X was elected pope, the three great painters of the Florentine-Roman High Renaissance style became involved in projects that diverted them from the paths they had hitherto been following.
Leonardo had been since 1506 at the French court in Milan, where he devoted a great deal of time to his treatises and his projects for the French king.
Michelangelo returned to the sculpture of the tomb of Julius II and in 1516 began to work in Florence on a number of architectural and sculptural projects for its Medici rulers.
Raphael became more and more involved with purely administrative duties as architect in charge of the new St. Peter’s and as surveyor of antiquities.
The great number of commissions he received led him more and more to rely on talented assistants and on the workers in the shop for the actual execution of his later works.
In the few works in which Raphael’s hand clearly appears, he seems to be moving away from the School of Athens style toward a new approach that had not been completely developed at the time of his death.
Raphael’s frescoes (1512–14) in the Stanza d’Elidoro already reveal Mannerist tensions in The Expulsion of Heliodorus from the Temple and an almost Baroque concern with light and shade in the Liberation of St. Peter.
The succeeding rooms were decorated largely by assistants.
It is only in such works as the Triumph of Galatea (1511), the Sistine Madonna (1513?),
or Raphael’s final unfinished work, the Transfiguration (1517), that he can be seen to move toward a nascent Mannerism and then away from it toward a more relaxed, more personal, and deeply moving reconsideration of High Renaissance ideals.
When Michelangelo returned to painting in 1534, he had already had some experience of Mannerism in Florence.
The past few years had not been entirely a matter of aesthetic enrichment, however, for they had witnessed the sack of Rome and the siege of Florence.
Some of the horror of those events emerges in The Last Judgment, painted in fresco on the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel.
Commissioned by Pope Clement VII, the work was executed during the pontificate of Paul III.
Rather than a Christian saviour, the Christ in Judgment is a thundering god in the way the pagan supreme god of the Romans, Jupiter, was, more concerned with damning the human race than welcoming the blessed into heaven.
The figures falling into hell and the torments of the damned attract the eye by their power and the emotions they reveal.
It is as though a new Dante had been born to depict hell with a brush rather than a pen.
Though the fresco met with strong but mixed reactions when it was unveiled in 1541, Pope Paul was pleased enough to commission two frescoes representing the Conversion of St. Paul and the Crucifixion of St. Peter for his own private chapel, the Pauline Chapel.
Since this chapel has never been open to the general public and since Michelangelo had already moved into his highly personal late style, these frescoes had little impact on the painting of the time.
The ideals of the High Renaissance as they appeared in the works of Leonardo, Raphael, and Michelangelo continued to develop independently in areas outside Rome and Florence.
In Parma, the painter known as Correggio formed his art under the influence of Mantegna and Leonardo’s Milanese followers.
His Rest on the Flight into Egypt and the Madonna of the Bowl (c. 1525) are clearly painted in the High Renaissance idiom.
Yet Correggio is perhaps best known for his frescoes at Parma in the cathedral and in the church of San Giovanni Evangelista, which seem to prefigure the style of painting found in the Baroque, and for his late series of sensuous paintings on the loves of Jupiter, all executed between about 1530 and 1534, consisting of Danae, Leda, and Jupiter and Io and The Rape of Ganymede.
THE HIGH RENAISSANCE IN VENICE
In the late 15th century, painting in Venice traveled much the same paths toward the High Renaissance as in Florence, while still maintaining a purely Venetian flavour.
Giovanni Bellini’s Madonnas of 1505–10 are stylistically similar to the Madonnas that Raphael was painting in Florence at about the same time.
The San Zaccaria altarpiece (Enthroned Madonna with Four Saints) of 1505 carries the sacra conversazione fully into the High Renaissance.
Inasmuch as Giovanni Bellini dominated Venetian painting, his style influenced the younger painters Giorgione and Titian, yet he was receptive enough to learn in turn from them and inventive enough to maintain his position of dominance.
Giorgione, having learned from Bellini, went beyond his master to bring to Venetian painting a treatment of landscape that can only be compared to pastoral poetry.
In his brief career (all his extant paintings date from the last five years of his life) this highly inventive young artist taught his contemporaries and successors how to exploit the medium of oil paint to create the illusion of textures, light, and air in their paintings.
His earliest known painting, the Madonna and Child with SS.
Francis and Liberale (c. 1504), derives from the style of the mature work of Bellini.
In only a few years Giorgione passed from this style of painting, through the turbulence of the dramatic landscape with storm clouds of The Tempest (c. 1505), to the dreamy landscape of the Pastoral Concert (c. 1510).
In the latter, Giorgione reveals the Venetians’ love of textures, for he carefully renders almost palpable the appearance of flesh, fabric, wood, stone, and foliage.
The soft, typically Venetian diffused light, together with the landscape, its hills stretching into the distance and all harsh or sharp contours removed (whether of landscape or figures), creates a gently pastoral mood.
The use of landscape to create a mood and the use of figures in the landscape to reflect or intensify that mood is an innovation characteristic of Venetian painting of the 16th century and one of great importance to the development of Baroque art.
Whatever the much-disputed significance of the figures in Giorgione’s painting The Tempest, it is certain that the picture soon came to be regarded merely as a landscape, and it is one of the first European paintings, certainly the first by a great artist, to make this sort of “background” material its subject matter.
Landscape painting was to become a specialization of artists only toward the close of the 16th century, and even then chiefly in northern Europe.
The impact of Giorgione on Venetian art was immediate and direct.
Bellini’s last works, such as The Feast of the Gods, owe much to Giorgione, but Giorgione’s greatest impact was on Titian.
Although Titian was never a student of Giorgione, he worked with him on one project and finished a number of his paintings.
The so-called Sacred and Profane Love of 1512–15 is, in a sense, Titian’s trial piece in which he shows himself capable of rivaling and surpassing Giorgione in Giorgione’s own terms.
The influence of Giorgione is especially marked in the profane paintings just as the religious paintings are marked by the influence of Bellini, Titian’s teacher and rival until his death, when Titian himself emerged as the leader of Venetian painting.
<Caption> Assumption, oil painting by Titian, 1516–18; in Santa Maria dei Frari, Venice.
SCALA/Art Resource, New York
Titian’s great masterpiece, the Assumption (1516–18), established his reputation as Bellini’s successor.
In the painting he exhibits the Venetians’ love of colour and texture, but he succeeds in achieving a balanced and moving composition that can only be compared to Raphael’s School of Athens in its grandeur.
The environment is both earth and heaven, yet it is created and defined by light and atmosphere in a typically Venetian way, rather than by architecture, as would have been more common in Florence.
This painting, together with the Sacred and Profane Love, Entombment, and the Pesaro Madonna (1519–26), typifies Titian’s contribution to the High Renaissance.
Upon the completion of the Assumption Titian undertook to execute a series of paintings on mythological themes for the court of Ferrara.
The Bacchanal (1518–19) was soon joined by the Worship of Venus (1518–19) and Bacchus and Ariadne (1520–23).
In The Bacchanal Titian reveals his mastery in treating mythological subjects.
The bacchants are disposed about the miraculous stream of wine that flows through an island, dancing, singing, and drinking.
The movement of the figures, the juxtaposition of nude and clothed, of male and female, creates a revel in which even the landscape seems to participate - only a Venetian could have created such a pagan, earthy, and hedonistic glorification of life.
On a trip to Rome in 1545 Titian succeeded in rivaling Raphael’s Portrait of Leo X with Cardinals Giulio de’ Medici and Luigi de’ Rossi and Michelangelo’s Leda and the Swan, while demonstrating that Venetian painting in its own unique way was the equal of the Florentine-Roman tradition.
The portrait of Pope Paul III and His Grandsons Ottavio and Cardinal Alessandro Farnese (1546) is a free variation on Raphael’s Leo X, but Titian altered the composition and introduced a narrative dimension more dramatic and compelling than that in any of his earlier portraits.
The Danae with Nursemaid (1553–54), from the same period, poses the colourism and sensuousness of Venetian painting against the sculptural and restrained tradition of Michelangelo for succeeding centuries to judge.
In his late works Titian carried the oil medium to new heights.
He used loosely juxtaposed patches of colour, sometimes allowing the prepared canvas to show through.
He applied paint freely and loosely with the brush and sometimes reworked it with his fingers.
Although his paintings have a fresh quality that makes them appear to have been painted quickly in the heat of inspiration, it is known from his biographers and friends that each work had been carefully studied, criticized, and reworked before the artist was satisfied.
Two works from this late period reveal the scope of Titian’s genius.
The Martyrdom of St. Lawrence was begun about 1548 after his return from Rome and before a trip to Augsburg and the court of the Holy Roman emperor Charles V. Although Titian was nearly 60, he painted with all the enthusiasm of youth.
There is a certain amount of Mannerist foreshortening and exaggeration, but Titian used these aspects of Mannerist vocabulary, together with the Venetians’ skill in the use of light, to emphasize the dramatic and emotional content of the painting.
Drama, light, and colour were used in the late Rape of Europa (c. 1559–62) in a way that prefigured the work of Rubens and the Baroque.
Titian’s genius, given full rein in his long and productive career, deeply influenced Venetian painting.
The two most outstanding painters of the end of the 16th century, Veronese and Tintoretto, each took a different aspect of Titian’s style and developed it.
Veronese is best known for the rich colour and interweaving compositions he learned from Titian.
His frescoes at the Villa Barbaro at Maser northwest of Venice are important for Venetian Mannerism and for landscape painting, but the richness of his palette is best seen in the mythologies, such as Mars and Venus United by Love, or the Marriage of St. Catherine.
With Tintoretto he decorated the chambers of the Doges’ Palace in Venice, partially supplanting the aging and busy Titian as official painter of the city; his Apotheosis of Venice (c. 1585) is a bold and successful use of dramatic foreshortening and rich colour to express the vigour and vibrancy of Venice.
Splendid also are his extremely large paintings crowded with figures, such as the Feast in the House of Levi (1573).
Tintoretto was most interested in Titian’s use of dramatic light and heightened emotion.
By 1548 he had established his reputation as a leading artist of the younger generation with his San Marco Freeing the Slave.
He decorated several chambers of the Doges’ Palace with a number of inventive mythological scenes.
A great part of his career and energy was devoted to the decoration of the Great School of San Rocco, Venice (1564–c.
1588).
Perhaps the crowning achievement of his career can be found in The Last Supper of 1594, painted for the church of San Giorgio Maggiore, Venice.
In this painting Tintoretto made use of all the rapidly receding diagonals and dramatic foreshortenings of the Mannerist vocabulary, but he brought to the painting the Venetians’ love of light effects to define the forms and heighten the drama.
The head of Christ is bathed in light that is repeated in the smoky lamps so that its true source cannot be known.
Light is used, as in the work of Titian, to pick out certain forms, throw others into darkness, and create a sense of movement within the composition.
A comparison of this painting with da Vinci’s Last Supper of 100 years earlier reveals the differences between the High Renaissance and the late 16th century.
ITALIAN MANNERISM OF THE LATE RENAISSANCE
The first reaction against da Vinci, Michelangelo, Raphael, and Andrea del Sarto occurred in Florence between 1515 and 1524, during which time the painters Giovanni Battista (called Rosso Fiorentino) and Jacopo da Pontormo broke decisively with the harmony and naturalism of the High Renaissance style.
Their movement, particularly what might be called their aesthetic anarchy, attracted the sympathetic attention of some 20th-century art historians, largely because of affinities such art historians saw between their work and modern trends, particularly Expressionism.
After the lead given by the German art historian Max Dvorˇák in his book Über Greco und der Manierismus (1921), these 16th-century nonconformists came to be known as Mannerists.
THE HALLMARKS OF MANNERISM
The term Mannerism is ultimately derived from the Italian word maniera (literally “style”).
It was in the 16th century that maniera was first consistently used in art criticism to indicate a definable quality - that of stylishness.
The Renaissance artist Giorgio Vasari, who is known chiefly for his biographies of artists, attributed this absolute quality of stylishness to Leonardo, Michelangelo, and Raphael, and, above all, to artists of his own day who had learned their styles from studying these great masters.
Standing at the head of the enormous representational discoveries of the Renaissance and with an increased knowledge of antiquity, Vasari was convinced that his contemporaries were in a position to understand the secret of true artistic style.
This was the maniera.
Taking Vasari’s quality of maniera as the key to Mannerism, it is possible to outline some of its hallmarks.
In figure style, the standard of formal complexity had been set by Michelangelo and that of idealized beauty by Raphael.
In the art of their followers, obsession with style in figure composition often outweighed the importance of the subject matter.
The highest value was placed upon the apparently effortless solution of considerable artistic problems, such as the portrayal of the nude figure in complex poses.
Specifically, the finished work was not supposed to betray signs of the labour that lay behind it.
While depending heavily upon ancient Roman art for many of its decorative motifs and for many of its standards of design, Mannerist style commonly exploited a certain degree of license within the classical vocabulary - what Vasari and contemporary literary theorists called “a departure from the normal usage.”
It was in the intellectualizing atmosphere of the Italian courts that Mannerism met with the greatest favour.
There the conscious intricacies of Mannerist compositions and the eloquent quotations from antiquity were well appreciated.
Court literature of this period displayed many analogous features.
Mannerism was first and foremost a connoisseur’s art - certainly not one that appealed to a churchman.
It is not surprising that the later Mannerist painters were censured by the church during the Counter-Reformation for painting altarpieces that were intended to demonstrate the virtuosity of their creators rather than illustrate a religious story.
Even Michelangelo was attacked, one critic calling him “the inventor of obscenities, who cultivated art at the expense of devotion.”
Factors such as these caused the style to fall into general disrepute, and, when in 1662 the French writer on architectural theory Fréart de Chambray coined the word Maniériste (translated six years later as “Mannerist” by the English diarist John Evelyn), he applied it in disparaging fashion to Vasari and his contemporaries, the practitioners of the maniera.
If, therefore, Mannerism is identified with the maniera, it can be historically related to a particular 16th-century style; but if it is applied strictly to early Rosso and Pontormo, as it was by Dvorˇák, it has no firm grounding in the way people in the 16th century thought about painting.
MANNERIST PAINTERS IN FLORENCE AND ROME
During the second decade of the 16th century, Andrea del Sarto had emerged as the foremost practitioner of High Renaissance naturalism in Florence.
The subtle and ambiguous emotional tension present beneath the harmony of Andrea del Sarto’s forms and colours was greatly accentuated by one of his pupils, Jacopo da Pontormo.
In Pontormo’s Visdomini Altarpiece (1518), the tension approaches the breaking point, the composition is vertical and lacking in a sense of space, and a host of similar but clashing centres of action create an impression of agitation.
Pontormo persisted with this expressive style, becoming increasingly influenced by the angular forms of Albrecht Dürer’s German engravings and by the more tortured aspects of Michelangelo’s figure style.
Vasari made it quite clear that Pontormo’s development was in direct contradiction to the later ideals of Mannerism.
The second of Andrea’s important pupils, Rosso Fiorentino, began in a not dissimilar spirit of expressive rebellion.
His highly unconventional Madonna with SS.
John the Baptist, Anthony Abbot, Jerome and Stephen for Santa Maria Nuova (1518) displays an aesthetic anarchy bolder than anything by Pontormo, and by the 1520s he was creating works of savage emotionality (e.g., the Volterra Deposition, 1521).
In 1523 Rosso journeyed to Rome.
There he was overwhelmed by three experiences: Michelangelo’s ceiling in the Sistine Chapel, the late style of Raphael, and the art of the newly arrived Parmigianino.
Parmigianino brought with him from Parma three sample pictures to display his virtuosity to Roman patrons.
His style, based originally upon that of Correggio, already possessed much of the attenuated elegance for which he became famous.
In Rome Parmigianino was hailed as the new Raphael and specifically as a painter capable of reproducing the sophisticated grace of Raphael’s late St. Michael.
Raphael had died in 1520, but his most authoritative late work in the Vatican stanze (papal apartments) was continued and developed by his foremost pupils, Giulio Romano (who left for Mantua in 1524) and Perino del Vaga.
Their Roman styles rely upon a direct though refined use of the art of classical antiquity as a source of inspiration and upon an ingenious exploitation of different levels of pictorial reality within a single decorative scheme.
The underlying artificiality of their manner was reinforced by the latent academicism of Michelangelo’s Sistine ceiling nudes.
Rosso’s encounter with the latest painting Rome offered resulted in a radical realignment of his style.
His Dead Christ with Angels (c. 1526), a subject that he would earlier have been inclined to treat with exceptional angularity of form, is executed with a new feeling for rarefied beauty.
Emotion is now expressed less overtly, and his handling of paint is less aggressive.
Rosso, Parmigianino, and Raphael’s pupils undoubtedly influenced each other during the mid-1520s, but in 1527 Rome was sacked, and the artists of Pope Clement VII’s court became scattered.
Parmigianino fled to Bologna, returning after four years to his native Parma, where he continued to develop his personal form of mannered beauty (e.g., Madonna of the Long Neck).
Perino found employment with the ruling family at Genoa, and Rosso visited a number of Italian cities before settling in France.
The sophisticated Mannerism that evolved in Rome before 1527 became the chief formative influence upon the styles of a number of important younger artists.
Vasari and Francesco Salviati had passed their period of apprenticeship in Andrea del Sarto’s Florence.
They parted in 1527 but resumed their close acquaintance in Rome (1531), and it was the Roman style that influenced their subsequent development.
Vasari, Salviati, and Jacopino del Conte, who worked with Salviati on the frescoes for San Giovanni Decollato, Rome, attempted to combine the formal and narrative artifice of the late Raphael decorations with the complex figure style of Michelangelo.
The result in Vasari’s case is undeniably eclectic, but Salviati created an individual maniera of enormous facility and inventiveness (e.g., Peace).
The Raphaelesque element in the Roman style was reinforced by Perino’s return to Rome in about 1538.
Salviati’s career was unsettled - he worked in Florence, Rome, Venice, and France - but Vasari returned to Florence to the court of the Medici duke Cosimo I, who had replaced in 1537 the unpopular (and assassinated) Alessandro de’ Medici.
Cosimo and his Spanish wife, Eleonora de Toledo, whose formal Iberian tastes influenced the artistic life of the court, shrewdly embarked on an ambitious series of propagandistic projects to consolidate his political position.
Vasari became the “stage manager” for much Medicean propaganda.
His success as a painter and architect after 1555 was considerable, but his most important contribution to Mannerism was undoubtedly his advocacy of Mannerist ideals in his Lives, first published in 1550 and revised and extended in 1568.
As Vasari realized, the most important painter in Cosimo’s court was Il Bronzino, a pupil of Pontormo.
Bronzino had, from the first, reduced the emotional content that had been an important feature of Pontormo’s style, and, during the 1530s in Florence, he began to establish a reputation as a court portrait painter.
His mature portraits are elegant, perfectly finished, ingenious in detail, and aloofly formal, reflecting the Spanish etiquette of Cosimo’s court.
Bronzino was adopted as favourite artist by Eleonora, receiving the commission to decorate her small private chapel in the Palazzo Vecchio.
The resulting frescoes are in no sense spiritually expressive, but they are brilliantly stylish, with references to antiquity, which displayed the erudition of both artist and sitter, and to Raphael and Michelangelo.
Bronzino was later influenced by the teachings of the Counter-Reformation, adopting a more modest narrative style, but his underlying aesthetic art remained a sense of maniera.
A number of later Mannerists responded similarly to the Counter-Reformation - Santi di Tito is particularly important in this respect - but it was only with Federico Barocci that the ideals of Mannerism were abandoned in favour of an all-pervasive piety in religious painting.
Barocci’s attractively fluent and softly coloured style, based largely upon Correggio, may be considered as an exceptional precursor of the Baroque style.
Barocci abandoned his Roman Mannerism as early as 1575, but the majority of his contemporaries in Rome and Florence continued to develop the eclectic aspects of the original maniera.
Daniele da Volterra and Pellegrino Tibaldi painted in an explicitly Michelangelesque manner, while Cavaliere d’Arpino (Giuseppe Cesari) and Federico Zuccari, at the end of the century, investigated the complex intellectual conceits of the Raphael studio style.
A painter, designer, and theorist, Zuccari is the most representative figure of this late phase; his travels - to Rome, Venice, Spain, England, France, and Antwerp (now in Belgium) - underline the internationalism of late Mannerist style.
Outside Florence and Rome, many of the major Italian cities succumbed to the spreading influence of Mannerism after 1527.
Siena, under the lead of Domenico Beccafumi, developed a bizarre form of emotional Mannerism, but only Venice maintained a steady, independent Mannerism.
Venice was certainly receptive to Mannerist influence - as seen in the works of Titian after 1530, Tintoretto, and Veronese - but, with the exception of Andrea Meldolla (Schiavone), Venetian painting continued to be dominated by non-Mannerist ideas in colouring and expression.
Vasari’s disparaging remarks about Tintoretto’s lack of good design show clearly that the differences between Romano-Florentine and Venetian painting remained fundamental.
The early and High Renaissance style as developed in Italy did not immediately dominate all European painting.
A few northern artists adopted Renaissance motifs but used them in a piecemeal manner without full comprehension of Italian compositional methods.
After 1520, however, northern and Spanish artists came increasingly to understand and adopt Mannerist ideas, and highly individual schools of Mannerism began to appear in various centres outside Italy.
Regional styles of considerable decorative flamboyance resulted from the fusion of the intricacies of the late Gothic style with the complexities of Mannerism.
RENAISSANCE PAINTING OUTSIDE ITALY
Some scholars speak of a Northern Renaissance and a Southern Renaissance.
The ideas that fueled the artists of Italy during this period spread throughout Europe, though at varying rates.
Painters in Germany and the Low Countries (or “Netherlandish” regions) were particularly productive, and those in France and Spain - most notably El Greco - also participated.
There was no doubt that the art of painting had changed.
FRANCE
Francis I of France, despite his military reverses in Italy, was enamoured of all things Italian.
He commissioned the celebrated goldsmith Benvenuto Cellini to execute both tableware and sculpture and prevailed upon friendly rulers in Italy to send him works by Titian and Bronzino and casts of sculpture.
He also imported Italian artists to design, build, and decorate his palaces, the Château de Madrid and Fontainebleau, both outside Paris.
Rosso arrived in France in 1530, followed two years later by his fellow Italian, the Mannerist Francesco Primaticcio.
In the gallery of Francis I at Fontainebleau, Rosso initiated a new and intricate decorative system in which stucco and painting form a richly luxuriant complex - the plastic realization of the late Raphaelesque decorative manner.
Primaticcio, who had been trained by Giulio Romano at Mantua and influenced by Parmigianino, took over Rosso’s leading position on the latter’s death in 1540.
His Ulysses Gallery at Fontainebleau continued and refined Rosso’s elaborate system of painted narratives surrounded by convoluted strapwork (a decorative design of narrow fillets or bands folded, crossed, and sometimes interlaced), elegant figures, and swags in stucco.
French artists at the court, such as the two Jean Cousins and Antoine Caron, quickly adopted aspects of Italian Mannerism to create a style of painting characterized as the school of Fontainebleau.
Less of a tendency to mimic the fashion was noticeable in Corneille de Lyon and Jean and François Clouet, whose portraits, while exhibiting some Mannerist qualities, recalled 15th-century court portraiture.
SPAIN
During the first decade of the 16th century, Fernando Yáñez, who may have assisted Leonardo da Vinci on the Battle of Anghiari in 1505, executed works showing a good knowledge of Italian Renaissance developments.
Further Italianate tendencies emerged strongly in the Valencian works of Juan de Macip and his son Juan de Juanes.
Full-fledged Mannerism made its appearance in the Seville cathedral in the Descent from the Cross (1547) by Pedro Campaña (Pieter de Kempeneer), an artist from Brussels, and subsequently in the refined court portraiture of Anthonis Mor (Sir Anthony More) and Alonso Sánchez Coello, whose royal portraits possess an elegance reminiscent of Bronzino’s Florentine style.
Although Campaña’s paintings are Mannerist in composition, they also foreshadow the expressiveness characteristic of Spanish style in the hands of Luis de Morales and El Greco.
From 1546 until his death in 1586, Morales remained almost exclusively in the provincial isolation of Badajoz, developing a highly individual art of great spiritual intensity, radically separated from the Mannerist mainstream.
El Greco, though born in Crete, was more fully conversant with Italian painting, having studied with Titian in Venice and later residing in Rome for two years.
His Spanish paintings exploit the anatomical attenuations of Roman Mannerism, but the vividly emotional qualities of his colour and paint handling depend almost entirely upon Venetian precedents - Tintoretto and Jacopo Bassano in particular.
Under the influence of Counter-Reformation mysticism in Toledo after 1575, he developed an increasingly personal and nonrealistic manner, indulging in space and supernatural light effects.
The narrative fervour of his style stands in sharp contrast to the stylish formalism of international Mannerism.
GERMANY
Albrecht Dürer was the first important German artist who displayed a profound understanding of Italian Renaissance art and theory.
Trained in Nürnberg in the late Gothic tradition, he had ambitions even as a youth far beyond the narrow confines of his native city and the late medieval style.
He traveled to Switzerland and the Rhine Valley and may have been in the Low Countries.
Shortly after his marriage in 1494 he made a brief trip to Italy, where he studied the works of Mantegna and the Venetians.
In 1505–07 he was again in Italy and was on intimate terms with Giovanni Bellini.
Dürer was interested in what he felt to be the “secrets” of Italian art and in the new humanism carried north by such friends as the German humanist Willibald Pirkheimer.
As a result, his paintings maintain the northerners’ love of detail, rendered meticulously in oil, but he joined to it the Italian interest in broadly conceived compositions.
In the Paumgärtner Altarpiece of 1502–04, for example, the saints in the wings are depicted with the scrolls and a complexity of composition more reminiscent of a heraldic achievement, while the broad planes of the architecture and the large, simple figures of the adoration shown on the central panel suggest an Italianate conception.
The Four Apostles of 1526 ultimately derives from the wings of Bellini’s Frari altarpiece.
Dürer’s close association with the Venetian painter and admiration for his art can be seen in the broad simple folds of the drapery, the breadth of handling of the heads, and the quality of the light depicted.
In the 16th century the Renaissance, as far as German painting was concerned, tended to follow the lines established by Dürer.
Two artists of note do emerge, but their styles are so individual that they do not represent a national school.
Lucas Cranach the Elder was deeply influenced by Dürer and the Danube school, an early 16th-century tradition of landscape painting that was in some ways a transition between the styles of Gothic and Renaissance painting.
By 1505 he had moved to Wittenberg and become court painter to the electors of Saxony.
There his style changed radically, epitomizing the dichotomy that existed in 16th-century northern European painting.
He developed in Wittenberg the full-length portrait in which the sitter is rendered with consummate skill and fidelity.
Cranach was a personal friend of Martin Luther and is probably best known for his portraits of the great reformer.
At the same time, his Reclining River Nymph at the Fountain of 1518 illustrates his knowledge of Giorgione and Venetian painting and points the way to the group of highly erotic female nudes of his later works.
<Caption> A Lucas Cranach portrait of Martin Luther, one of the artist’s favourite subjects.
The Bridgeman Art Library/Getty Images
Hans Holbein the Younger was trained by his father in Augsburg but took up residence in Basel, Switz.,
about 1515.
He early developed a portrait style that was greatly sought after by the burghers of Basel.
His portraits of Burgomaster Meyer and his wife (1516) or of Bonifacius Amerbach (1519) show his gift for characterization.
In 1526 he made his first trip to London, where he painted Sir Thomas More with His Household (1527).
In 1532 religious troubles in Basel were so intense that he accepted a position at the English court and left the city forever.
He is perhaps best known for his portraits of Henry VIII, Henry’s bride Anne of Cleves (1539), and Christina of Denmark (1538), at one time considered by the king as a possible bride.
Jean de Dinteville and Georges de Selve (The Ambassadors, 1533), which depicts two French ambassadors to the English court, is probably the greatest tour de force of his years in England.
The two sitters are rendered faithfully in a well-defined room and are surrounded by the trappings of 16th-century humanism - e.g.,
books, globes, musical instruments.
Holbein’s portraits were all painted with a great understanding of the sitter and often have a note of Italian elegance.
His surfaces tend to be tight and hard, yet there is a certain expansiveness created by the positioning within the frame.
He established a portrait tradition in England and also contributed to the popularity of the miniature in that country.
THE LOW COUNTRIES AND NETHERLANDISH ART
The term Netherlandish is meant to encompass both the Burgundian art and the Flemish art of the period, as well as the low-lying region of coastal northwestern Europe.
The art of Burgundy and Flanders followed a common path for a time after John II of France, in 1363, titled his son Philip, surnamed the Bold, duke of Burgundy.
By marriage to the heiress of Flanders, Philip added to his duchy, on the death of his father-in-law in 1384, the countship of Flanders.
The formidable Flemish–Burgundian alliance remained intact until 1482, when Philip the Bold’s great-granddaughter Mary of Burgundy died.
Philip’s capital was Dijon, which he embellished with works of art.
In the chapel of the Carthusian monastery, the Chartreuse de Champmol, he planned a dynastic necropolis, and until the French Revolution his tomb and those of his son and grandson could be seen there.
Claus Sluter (c. 1340–1406) was his chief sculptor.
Among the painters in service at Dijon were Jean Malouel, Henri Bellechose, and Melchior Broederlam (flourished 1381–c.
1409).
Broederlam was one of the first masters to explore the use of disguised symbolism in the representation of an ultra-naturalistic world, and in the scenes that he painted on a set of altar wings for Dijon there are several levels of implied meaning.
Under the duke’s grandson and namesake, Philip the Good (reigned 1419–67), patronage of the arts continued on an even larger scale.
Not the least of the new duke’s projects was his library, which eventually contained about 250 illuminated manuscripts.
Realizing the propaganda value of art, Philip the Good filled his long reign with lavish spectacles such as triumphal processions and elaborate state banquets.
Many artists spent large portions of their careers on these “temporary” achievements.
The name of Jan van Eyck appears frequently in the ducal accounts.
He traveled to several foreign countries, presumably to make portrait and reconnaissance drawings and once to paint a portrait of Isabella of Portugal (1428); the duke approved of the portrait and subsequently married the princess.
Van Eyck perfected an oil and varnish technique that other masters in Flanders adopted, enabling the brilliant colours of their paintings to survive unchanged.
Of van Eyck’s works, The Adoration of the Lamb (also called Ghent Altarpiece, finished 1432), and The Marriage of Giovanni Arnolfini and Giovanna Cenami (1434), were the most important and are the best known.
There were many other painters whose works celebrated the wealth and intellectuality of 15th-century Flanders.
Van Eyck’s most important contemporary was the Master of Flémalle (now thought to be Robert Campin) and, in the next generation, Rogier van der Weyden (1399/1400–1464) of Brussels succeeded him in the duke’s esteem.
The gentle linearity and movement, reticent sentiment, and soft colouring in the paintings of Rogier were to have a profound influence on the art of neighbouring countries as well as on that of Quattrocento Italy in the later 15th century.
The meticulousness with which the early Flemish painters recorded nature, their innate sense of design, and their highly compressed symbolism was continued and further developed by their followers.
Among the masters who were active up until the end of the Burgundian-Flemish political alliance are Petrus Christus (c. 1420–1472/73), Dieric Bouts, Hugo van der Goes, and Hans Memling.
<Caption> Flowers, detail from the central panel of the Portinari Altarpiece by Hugo van der Goes, c. 1476; in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence.
The flowers in the pottery jar are in royal colours, for Christ was of the royal line of the Israelite King David.
Scala/Art Resource, New York
In the Low Countries there emerged early in the 16th century a group of painters sometimes misleadingly lumped together as the Antwerp Mannerists.
Their exaggerated and fanciful compositions descend in great part from the decorative excesses of late Gothic art, generally with some Italianate details probably transmitted by architects’ and goldsmiths’ pattern books.
The Flemish painter Jan Gossaert, called Mabuse, visited Rome in 1508.
At first he continued his ornate late Gothic style, but by 1514 he began to adopt the great innovations occurring in Italian painting.
His mythological paintings, such as the Neptune and Amphitrite of 1516, indicate that he was able to understand only the superficialities and not the motivation and terribilità of Michelangelo’s nudes.
Bernard van Orley remained in Brussels and learned of Italy through Raphael’s cartoons, which were sent to Brussels to be woven into tapestries.
Before the end of the century, painters such as Jan van Scorel, Maerten van Heemskerck, and Sir Anthony More (a Utrecht-born portraitist knighted by Queen Mary I of England) were absorbing Italian influences.
Van Scorel demonstrated a specifically Venetian influence, yet all three created an art that was distinctly their own.
Joachim Patinir’s depiction of the world around him, particularly of landscape, parallels Italian developments in northern terms and greatly influenced Pieter Bruegel the Elder.
Pieter Bruegel the Elder visited Italy in 1551–53 but was more influenced by the Italian and particularly Alpine landscape than by Italian painting.
His two-dimensional sources are to be found rather in the popular prints of the time, the landscapes of Patinir, and the fantasies of Bosch.
He was also a great observer of peasant life.
Bruegel spent his adult life in the company of learned humanists, yet he showed no real interest in classical mythological subjects or antiquity.
His paintings illustrating Low Countries’ proverbs, children’s games, or The Fight Between Carnival and Lent (1559) reveal an interest in popular themes and common life rather than in the pedantic Romanizing compositions of some of his contemporaries.
This choice of subject matter, latent from the early 15th century in the Low Countries, was given new dimensions by Bruegel.
His series of depictions of the months is at once a revival of the labours of the months found in the portal sculptures of Gothic cathedrals and medieval books of hours and at the same time a new treatment of rural landscape and the peasants who work the land.
His Harvesters (1565) displays a remarkable sensitivity to colour and pattern.
The intense golden yellow of the ripe wheat sets up a bold pattern across the lower half of the picture and contrasts with the cool greens and blues of the limitless plain stretching off into the distance.
Some figures move across a lane cut through the wheat, while others cut into what seems a solid space.
The sleeping peasants resting after their noon meal are disposed in patterns and poses that make one feel the heat and calm of the summer’s day.
This sympathetic view of peasant life, with its bold geometric patterns, runs throughout the series of the months.
Bruegel brought to an end the 16th century in the north and prepared the way for the Baroque.
His sons and grandsons were important painters who helped to train some of the leading artists of the 17th century in the Low Countries.
It was the elder Bruegel, however, who made landscape and peasant life an accepted subject for painting in the Renaissance.
The Mannerist style was not comprehended as soon in the 16th century in the Low Countries as it had been in France or Spain.
With the notable exception of Frans Floris, it was not until the generation of artists born during the middle years of the century that Mannerism was fully assimilated.
This generation of Flemish and Dutch Mannerists was influenced chiefly by the Italian Mannerists of the second half of the century: Frederik Sustris studied with Vasari; Hendrik Goltzius was an associate of Taddeo Zuccari, Federico’s older brother; Johann von Aachen remained in Rome between 1574 and 1588; and Bartholomaeus Spranger collaborated with Federico Zuccari.
Haarlem and Amsterdam became the early centres for northern Mannerism.
Spranger’s style was diffused throughout Europe by the engravings of his colleague Goltzius.
Finally, as a late flowering of international Mannerism, Carel van Mander founded a Vasarian academy in Haarlem, in 1604 publishing his biographies of Netherlandish artists in direct emulation of Vasari.
PAINTERS OF THE EARLY RENAISSANCE
Renaissance painting was founded by Masaccio.
The intellectuality of Masaccio’s conceptions, the monumentality of his compositions, and the high degree of naturalism in his works mark him as a pivotal figure in Renaissance painting.
But a number of other painters also were instrumental in spreading the ideas of the era.
Following are profiles of the most noteworthy painters of the early Renaissance.
PAOLO UCCELLO (b. 1397, Pratovecchio, near Florence - d.
Dec. 10, 1475, Florence)
By the time Paolo di Dono (later known as Paolo Uccello) was 10 years old he was already an apprentice in the workshop of the sculptor Lorenzo Ghiberti, who was then at work on what became one of the masterpieces of Renaissance art - the bronze doors for the Baptistery of the Florence cathedral.
In 1414 Uccello joined the confraternity of painters (Compagnia di San Luca), and in the following year he became a member of the Arte dei Medici e degli Speziali, the official painters’ guild in Florence.
Though Uccello must by then have been established as an independent painter, nothing of his work from this time remains, and there is no definite indication of his early training as a painter, except that he was a member of the workshop of Ghiberti, where many outstanding artists of the time were trained.
EARLY WORK
Uccello’s earliest, and now badly damaged, frescoes are in the Chiostro Verde (the Green Cloister, so called because of the green cast of the frescoes that covered its walls) of Santa Maria Novella.
They represent episodes from the Creation.
These frescoes, marked with a pervasive concern for elegant linear forms and insistent, stylized patterning of landscape features, are consistent with the late Gothic tradition that was still predominant at the beginning of the 15th century in Florentine studios.
From 1425 to 1431, Uccello worked in Venice as a master mosaicist, but all his work in Venice has been lost.
Uccello may have been induced to return to Florence by the commission for a series of frescoes in the cloister of San Miniato al Monte depicting scenes from monastic legends.
While the figural formulations of these ruinous frescoes still closely approximate those of the Santa Maria Novella cycle, there is also a fascination with the novel perspective schemes that had appeared in Florence during Uccello’s Venetian sojourn and with a simplified and more monumental treatment of forms deriving from the recent sculpture of Donatello and Nanni di Banco.
LATER YEARS
In 1436 in the Florence cathedral, Uccello completed a monochrome fresco of an equestrian monument to Sir John Hawkwood, an English mercenary who had commanded Florentine troops at the end of the 14th century.
In the Hawkwood fresco, a single-point perspective scheme, a fully sculptural treatment of the horse and rider, and a sense of controlled potential energy within the figure all indicate Uccello’s desire to assimilate the new style of the Renaissance that had blossomed in Florence since his birth.
Following the Hawkwood monument, in 1443 Uccello completed four heads of prophets around a colossal clock on the interior of the west facade of the cathedral.
Between 1443 and 1445 he contributed the designs for two stained-glass windows in the cupola.
After a brief trip to Padua in 1447, Uccello returned to the Chiostro Verde of Santa Maria Novella.
In a fresco illustrating the Flood and the recession of the water, Uccello presented two separate scenes united by a rapidly receding perspective scheme that reflected the influence of Donatello’s contemporary reliefs in Padua.
Human forms in The Flood, especially the nudes, were reminiscent of figures in Masaccio’s frescoes in the Brancacci Chapel, perhaps the most influential of all paintings of the early Renaissance.
More than any other painting by Uccello, The Flood illustrates the artist’s love for perspective.
Perhaps Uccello’s most famous paintings are three panels representing the Battle of San Romano.
These panels represent the victory in 1432 of Florentine forces under Niccolò da Tolentino over the troops of their archrival, Siena.
There are Renaissance elements, such as a sculptural treatment of forms and fragments of a broken perspective scheme in this work, but the bright handling of colour and the elaborate decorative patterns of the figures and landscape are indebted to the Gothic style.
The older style continued to be used through the 15th century in Florence to enrich the environments of the new princes of the day, such as the Medici, who acquired all three of the panels representing the Battle of San Romano.
Uccello is justly famous for his careful and sophisticated perspective studies, most clearly visible in The Flood, in the underdrawing (called sinopia, for the reddish-brown pigment of the same name) for his last fresco, The Nativity, and in three drawings universally attributed to him that are now in the Uffizi.
These drawings indicate a meticulous, analytic mind, keenly interested in the application of scientific laws to the reconstruction of objects in a three-dimensional space.
In these studies he was probably assisted by a noted mathematician, Paolo Toscanelli.
Uccello’s perspective studies were to influence the Renaissance art treatises of artists such as Piero della Francesca, Leonardo da Vinci, and Albrecht Dürer.
Uccello apparently led an increasingly reclusive existence during his last years.
FRA ANGELICO (b. c. 1400, Vicchio, republic of Florence - d.
Feb. 18, 1455, Rome)
Baptized Guido di Pietro, he appeared in a document of 1417 as a lay painter.
Later, between the years 1420 and 1422, he became a Dominican friar and resided in the priory of San Domenico at Fiesole, there taking the name of Fra Giovanni da Fiesole.
At Fiesole he was probably influenced by the teachings of Giovanni Dominici, the militant leader of the reformed Dominicans.
The writings of Dominici defended traditional spirituality against the onslaught of humanism.
SAN DOMENICO PERIOD
Angelico was also influenced by his fellow friar St. Antoninus Pierozzi, who became the archbishop of Florence when Fra Angelico refused the post and who may have consolidated Angelico’s faith.
It is believed that Antoninus also may have inspired some of Angelico’s compositions.
According to his earliest biographer, Angelico was trained by the greatest painter and miniaturist of the Gothic tradition, Lorenzo Monaco, whose influence may be seen in the clear, painstaking delicacy of execution and the vibrant luminosity that seem to spiritualize the figures in Angelico’s paintings.
These qualities are notably apparent in two small altarpieces, Madonna of the Star and The Annunciation.
Angelico’s Deposition for Santa Trinità in Florence was once attributed to Monaco, who had begun it before he died in 1425.
Monaco had divided it into a triptych and executed the pinnacles.
Angelico, however, made it a unified altarpiece with a vast landscape dominated by a varicoloured hill town.
It is perhaps an imaginative evocation of Cortona, where Fra Angelico spent some time and where some of his important works are to be found.
Against that background are sharply outlined human figures in interconnected groups; their features are so delicately traced that attempts have been made to identify them as portraits.
These arrangements of figures attest to Angelico’s deep knowledge of the formalism that characterized the art of the early Renaissance.
Two strands were interwoven in Angelico’s life at Fiesole: the pious life of a friar and continuous activity as a painter.
Vasari described him as “saintly and excellent,” and, not long after his death, he was called angelico (“angelic”) because of his moral virtues.
This subsequently became the name by which he is best known, often preceded by the word beato (“blessed”).
Angelico knew and followed closely the new artistic trends of his time, above all the representation of space by means of perspective.
In works such as the large Last Judgment and The Coronation of the Virgin, for example, the human figures receding toward the rear themselves create a feeling of space similar to that in the paintings of Angelico’s great Florentine contemporary Masaccio.
The earliest work by Angelico that can be dated with certainty is a triptych of huge dimensions that he painted for the linen merchants’ guild (or Arte dei Linaiuoli; hence its name, the Linaiuoli Altarpiece).
It is dated July 11, 1433.
Enclosed in a marble shrine designed by the Florentine sculptor Lorenzo Ghiberti, this altarpiece represents the Virgin and Son facing forward, monumentally, and, surrounding them in a minor key, charming angels, developing the motif of the Madonna of the Star.
The group has affinities with the Florentine Maestà (i.e., Madonna and child enthroned in majesty) of the 14th century, but the influence of Masaccio may be seen in the formalism of the construction and in the innovative use of light and colour.
Angelico finished the work with a predella, or narrow strip of paintings along the bottom of the altarpiece; this group of paintings includes The Adoration of the Magi and The Martyrdom of St. Mark, which are lucid and compact in their narrative and have a strictly defined perspective, a technique that is even more effective in the small painting depicting the naming of John the Baptist.
In the early 1430s, Angelico was commissioned to paint the Deposition for the sacristy of the Church of Santa Trinità as a companion piece to Gentile da Fabriano’s Adoration of the Magi.
As mentioned earlier, Angelico took over this painting after the death of Lorenzo Monaco in 1425.
In Angelico’s painting, the dead Christ is gently lowered from the cross and is mourned in silent grief by the Virgin Mary and a group of women on the left of the composition.
On the right, a group of men clothed in contemporary Florentine dress stand in mute contemplation.
One of these figures might be the portrait of Palla Strozzi, the patron of the chapel and of the altarpiece.
Strozzi, who was at the time one of the richest men in Europe and a rival to Cosimo de’ Medici, was exiled in 1434.
The altarpiece might have been finished after his exile, possibly about 1440.
The Deposition is one of the first paintings in the Italian Renaissance to depict figures in a receding landscape rather than in a space set as a foreground stage.
In the background, Angelico depicted the city of Jerusalem.
<Caption> The Annunciation, fresco by Fra Angelico, 1438–45; in the Museum of San Marco, Florence.
SCALA/Art Resource, New York
Also in the 1430s, Angelico painted one of the most inspired works of the Florentine Renaissance, The Annunciation, an altarpiece significantly superior to his two other paintings on the same subject.
It shows the Garden of Eden with Adam and Eve being driven out by the Angel yet also under the sway of the radiant messenger and pure maiden who are portrayed in the space of a Renaissance-style portico.
The predella is skillfully divided into stories of the Virgin Mary, naturalistically portrayed - especially the Visitation, which has a realistic panorama.
Angelico always followed reality closely, even when he used a miniaturist technique.
Occasionally, he resorted to medieval techniques, such as a gold background, in deference to the taste of those who commissioned the work, but his figures still emerge quite distinctly from the panels, in the Renaissance manner, revealing the painter’s increasingly sure and harmonious pictorial idiom.
Angelico’s Annalena Altarpiece, also of the 1430s, is, so far as is known, the first sacra conversazione of the Renaissance.
YEARS AT THE PRIORY OF SAN MARCO
Angelico remained in the Fiesole priory until 1439, when he entered the priory of San Marco in Florence.
There he worked mostly on frescoes.
San Marco had been transferred from the Sylvestrine monks to the Dominicans in 1436, and the rebuilding of the church and its spacious priory began about 1438, from designs by the Florentine architect and sculptor Michelozzo.
The construction was generously subsidized by the Medici family.
Angelico was commissioned about 1438 by Cosimo de’ Medici the Elder to execute the altarpiece, for which he again painted a sacra conversazione.
When the church was consecrated at Epiphany in 1443, the altarpiece must have dominated the place of worship.
Angelico portrayed the Virgin and child raised high on a throne, with saints on either side receding into space; among them are the two patron saints of the Medici, Cosmas and Damian.
This work, one of the most compelling Fra Angelico created, ends in a dense grove of cypresses, palms, and pines against a deep but toneless sky.
His figures seem cleansed of any human passion and appear to have supreme serenity of spirit.
A predella, showing eight little legends of the two Medicean saints separated by a Pietà (Virgin Mary holding the body of Christ), completed the work.
These paintings are now scattered among various museums.
On the walls of the priory of San Marco in Florence are the paintings that mark the high point of Angelico’s career.
In the chapter hall, he executed a large Crucifixion that seems akin to the “Moralities” of the 14th century, which urged detachment from worldly vanities and salvation through Christ alone.
In addition to the three crucified figures against the sky, Angelico painted groups of ritual figures, rhythmically arranged, with a chorus of martyrs, founders of religious orders, hermits, and defenders of the Dominican order (whose genealogical tree is depicted beneath this striking scene), as well as the two Medicean saints.
Thus, in the comprehensiveness of this work, Fra Angelico developed a concept that was barely suggested in his earlier altarpieces.
He portrayed the exaltation of the Redeemer in many other paintings in the priory’s first cloister and in its cells.
In one corridor he executed an Annunciation that broadened the pattern of his earlier one in Cortona.
In the cells, he proclaimed devotion to Christ crucified in at least 20 examples, all related to monastic life.
The pictorial work in these narrow spaces is intricate, probably the work of numerous hands directed by the master, including Benozzo Gozzoli, the greatest of Fra Angelico’s disciples, and Zanobi Strozzi, another pupil better known as a miniaturist, as well as his earliest collaborator, Battista Sanguigni.
The hand of Fra Angelico himself is identifiable in the first 10 cells on the eastern side.
Three subjects merit particular attention: a Resurrection, a coronation of the Virgin, and, especially, a gentle Annunciation, presented on a bare white gallery, with St. Peter Martyr in prayer, timidly facing the group, his coloured habit contrasting with the delicate two tones of pink in the garments of the Virgin and the Angel.
The cells, originally hidden from public view because of monastic vows of reclusion, reveal the secret joy of the painter-friar in creating figures of purity to move his fellow friars to meditation and prayer.
The images in these paintings are the lyrical expressions of a painter who was also their prior.
ROMAN PERIOD
At the end of 1446, Fra Angelico was called to Rome by Pope Eugene IV, and he remained there until about 1450.
In the summer of 1447, however, he had undertaken to decorate the chapel of San Brizio in the cathedral of Orvieto.
Angelico’s assistants, above all Gozzoli, worked closely with him on two canvases, crowded with figures, in this chapel.
These canvases, of Christ the Judge amid the hierarchy of angels and the chorus of the prophets, respectively, were only partially executed by Angelico; they were continued more than 50 years later by Luca Signorelli.
In Rome the frescoes that Angelico executed in a chapel of St. Peter’s (c. 1446–47), in the chapel of the Sacrament in the Vatican (not before 1447), and in the studio of Pope Nicholas V (1449) have all been destroyed.
But the Vatican still possesses his decorative painting for the Chapel of Niccolò V. There he painted scenes from the lives of Saints Stephen and Lawrence, along with figures of the Evangelists and saints, repeating some of the patterns of the predella on his altarpiece of San Marco.
The consecration scene of St. Stephen and that of St. Lawrence are both set in solemn cathedral interiors, and the almsgiving of St. Lawrence is set against the background of a temple.
In this scene particularly, Angelico imbued the poor and afflicted who surround the deacon-saint with a serenity that purifies them and illuminates them with an inner light, rendering them equals of the blessed figures on the altarpieces.
At the same time, the organization of these works and the rendering of architecture in them mark the culmination of his development as a Renaissance artist.
About 1450 Fra Angelico returned to Florence, where, still a friar, he became prior of the priory of San Domenico in Fiesole (1450–c.
June 1452).
His most notable work of this time was the cycle of 35 paintings of scenes from the life of Christ and other subjects for the doors of a silver chest in the sanctuary of the Church of Santissima Annunziata in Florence.
These works, which have been extensively repainted, are probably distant echoes of the destroyed paintings in the Chapel of Niccolò V. Although the authenticity of these works is disputed, the Massacre of the Innocents, Flight into Egypt, and Presentation in the Temple seem to be Angelico’s because of the bright spontaneity of the slender figures, as well as the spatiality of the surroundings and the landscape.
Such traits derived from the artist’s vast experience in mural painting.
In most of these little pictures, however, there is a kind of disconnectedness and weariness, indicating the hand of pupils whose art was a far cry from Fra Angelico’s ineffable poetry.
There is still a certain monumental tone in the late altarpiece he executed in the monastery of Bosco ai Frati in the Mugello.
With the completion of this altarpiece and several other minor works, Fra Angelico’s fertile artistic labours drew to a close.
In 1453 or 1454, Fra Angelico again went to Rome, where he died in the Dominican priory in which he had stayed during his first visit to that city.
He was buried in the nearby church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva, where his tomb remains an object of veneration.
MASACCIO (b. Dec. 21, 1401, Castel San Giovanni [now San Giovanni Valdarno, near Florence, Italy] - d.
autumn 1428, Rome)
Tommaso di Giovanni di Simone Guidi was born in what is now the town of San Giovanni Valdarno, in the Tuscan province of Arezzo, some 40 miles (65 km) southeast of Florence.
He received the nickname Masaccio (loosely translated as “Big Tom,” or “Clumsy Tom”) because of his absentmindedness about worldly affairs, carelessness about his personal appearance, and other heedless - but good-natured - behaviour.
APPRENTICESHIP AND EARLY WORKS
One of the most tantalizing questions about Masaccio revolves around his artistic apprenticeship.
Young boys, sometimes not yet in their teens, would be apprenticed to a master.
They would spend several years in his workshop learning all the necessary skills involved in making many types of art.
Certainly Masaccio underwent such training, but there remains no trace of where, when, or with whom he studied.
From his birthdate in 1401 until Jan. 7, 1422, absolutely nothing is known about Masaccio.
On the latter date he entered the Florentine Arte dei Medici e Speziali, the guild to which painters belonged.
It is safe to assume that by his matriculation, he was already a full-fledged painter ready to supervise his own workshop.
Where he had been between his birth and his 21st year remains, like so much about him, a tantalizing mystery.
THE BRANCACCI CHAPEL
Shortly after completing the Pisa Altarpiece, Masaccio began working on what was to be his masterpiece and what was to inspire future generations of artists: the frescoes of the Brancacci Chapel (c. 1427) in the Florentine Church of Santa Maria del Carmine.
He was commissioned to finish painting the chapel’s scenes of the stories of St. Peter after Masolino (1383–1447) had abandoned the job.
It is now generally thought that Masaccio was responsible for the following sections: the Expulsion of Adam and Eve, Baptism of the Neophytes, The Tribute Money, St. Peter Enthroned, St. Peter Healing the Sick with His Shadow, St. Peter Distributing Alms, and part of the Resurrection of the Son of Theophilus.
The radical differences between the two painters are seen clearly in the pendant frescoes of the Temptation of Adam and Eve by Masolino and Masaccio’s Expulsion of Adam and Eve, which preface the St. Peter stories.
Masolino’s figures are dainty, wiry, and elegant, while Masaccio’s are highly dramatic, volumetric, and expansive.
Masaccio’s figures are constructed not with line but with strongly differentiated areas of light and dark that give them a pronounced three-dimensional sense of relief.
The Tribute Money, the most famous of Masaccio’s frescoes to adorn the walls of Brancacci Chapel.
SuperStock/Getty Images
The boldness of conception and execution - the paint is applied in sweeping, form-creating bold slashes - of the Expulsion of Adam and Eve marks all of Masaccio’s frescoes in the chapel.
The most famous of these is The Tribute Money, which rivals Michelangelo’s David as an icon of Renaissance art.
The Tribute Money, which depicts the debate between Christ and his followers about the rightness of paying tribute to earthly authorities, is populated by solid, anatomically convincing figures remarkable for their weight and gravity.
The figures, set in a clear, controlled space lit by a consistent fall of light, attain a monumentality and seriousness hitherto unknown.
They are the very embodiments of human dignity and virtue so valued by Renaissance philosophers and humanists.
In The Tribute Money, Masaccio decisively broke with the medieval conception of a picture as something governed by different and arbitrary physical laws.
Instead, he embraced the concept of a painting as a window behind which a continuation of the real world is to be found, with the same laws of space, light, form, and perspective that obtain in reality.
This concept was to remain the basic idiom of Western painting for the next 450 years.
Masaccio’s earliest extant work is a small triptych dated April 23, 1422, or about three months after he matriculated in the Florentine guild.
This triptych, consisting of the Madonna Enthroned, two adoring angels, and saints, was painted for the Church of San Giovenale in the town of Cascia, near San Giovanni Valdarno.
It displays an acute knowledge of Florentine painting, but its eclectic style is strongly influenced by Giotto and Andrea Orcagna.
The triptych is a powerfully impressive demonstration of the skill of the young, but already highly accomplished, artist.
Compared to the lyrical, elegant art of Lorenzo Monaco and Gentile da Fabriano, Masaccio’s forms are startlingly direct and massive.
The triptych’s tight, spare composition and the unidealized and vigorous portrayal of the plain Madonna and Child at its centre does not in the least resemble contemporary Florentine painting.
The figures do, however, reveal a complete understanding of the revolutionary art of Donatello, the founder of the Florentine Renaissance sculptural style, whose early works Masaccio studied with care.
Donatello’s realistic sculptures taught Masaccio how to render and articulate the human body and provide it with gestural and emotional expression.
After the Giovenale Triptych, Masaccio’s next important work was a sizable, multi-paneled altarpiece for the Church of Santa Maria del Carmine at Pisa in 1426.
This important commission demonstrates his growing reputation outside Florence.
Unfortunately, the Pisa Altarpiece was dismantled in the 18th century and many of its parts lost, but 13 sections of it have been rediscovered and identified in museums and private collections.
The altarpiece’s images, which include the Madonna and Child originally at its centre, amplify the direct, realistic character of the 1422 triptych.
Ensconced in a massive throne inspired by classical architecture, the Madonna is viewed from below and seems to tower over the spectator.
The contrast between the bright lighting on her right side and the deep shadow on her left impart an unprecedented sense of volume and depth to the figure.
Originally placed beneath the Madonna, the rectangular panel depicting the Adoration of the Magi is notable for its realistic figures, which include portraits, most likely those of the donor and his family.
Like the Madonna and Child, the panel of the Adoration of the Magi is notable for its deep, vibrant hues so different from the prevailing pastels found in contemporary Florentine painting.
Unlike his fellow artists, Masaccio used colour specifically to help impart the illusion of solidity to the painted figure.
THE TRINITY
The Trinity, a fresco in the Church of Santa Maria Novella, also presents important pictorial innovations that embody contemporary concerns and influences.
Painted about 1427, it was probably Masaccio’s last work in Florence.
It represents the Trinity (Father, Son, and Holy Spirit) set in a barrel-vaulted hall before which kneel two donors.
The deep coffered vault is depicted using a nearly perfect one-point system of linear perspective, in which all the orthogonals recede to a central vanishing point.
Masaccio’s Trinity is the first extant example of the systematic use of one-point perspective in a painting.
Documentation suggests that Masaccio left Florence for Rome, where he died about 1428.
His career was short, lasting only about six years, and he left neither a workshop nor any pupils to carry on his style, but his few paintings made an immediate and lasting impact on Florence and indeed on Western painting itself.
FRA FILIPPO LIPPI (b. c. 1406, Florence - d.
Oct. 8/10, 1469, Spoleto, Papal States)
Filippo Lippi was born into a large and poor family, and, after the death of both his father and mother, the young Filippo was raised by an aunt for some years.
Later she placed him with his brother in the convent of Carmelite monks at Santa Maria del Carmine.
The monastery’s Brancacci Chapel was at that time being decorated with frescoes by Masaccio.
These frescoes were Lippi’s first important contact with art.
In 1432 Lippi left the monastery after having painted some frescoes in the church and in the cloister.
According to the Renaissance biographer Giorgio Vasari, who wrote a lively and fanciful profile of the painter, Lippi was abducted with some companions by the Moors on the Adriatic, held as a slave for 18 months, and then freed after he painted a portrait of his owner.
It is known that in 1434 the artist was at Padua.
None of the works executed while he was at Padua are known, but the effect of his presence may be recognized in the paintings of others there, such as Andrea Mantegna.
In 1437 Lippi returned to Florence, protected by the powerful Medici family, and was commissioned to execute several works for convents and churches.
The qualities he acquired during his years of travel are affirmed with clarity in two works of 1437, immediately after he returned from Padua: The Virgin and Child Between SS.
Frediano and Augustin and the Madonna and Child.
In both of these altarpieces, the influence of Masaccio is still evident, but it is absorbed into a different style, having the pictorial effect of bas-relief, rendered more evident by lines, so that it resembles the reliefs of the sculptors Donatello and Jacopo della Quercia.
In these works, the colour is warm, toned down with shadings, approaching the limpid chromatics of his great contemporary Fra Angelico.
Still further testimony to Lippi’s development is the Annunciation, once believed to be a late work but now dated between 1441 and 1443.
It is composed in a new way, using perspective and skillful contrasts between colour and form.
The suggested movement of the light garments of the two frightened girls at the door is rendered with such sensitivity as to anticipate Sandro Botticelli.
A famous altarpiece of the same time, Lippi’s well-known Coronation of the Virgin, is a complex work crowded with figures.
The celebrated altarpiece is exquisitely sumptuous in appearance and marks a historic point in Florentine painting in its success in uniting as one scene the various panels of a polyptych.
The altarpieces are characterized by a solemnity of composition that is absent from the paintings in which he developed a typical motif of 15th-century Florentine art: the Madonna with the Child at her breast.
The masterpiece of these is Madonna with Child and Scenes from the Life of Mary, a circular painting.
It is a clear and realistic mirror of life, transfigured in a most intimate way.
A second Coronation of the Virgin, executed about 1445, displays a marked change in the style of Lippi - from the plastic values suggested by his study of Masaccio to the serene chromatics of Angelico.
<Caption> The Virgin Adoring the Child, oil on wood panel by Fra Filippo Lippi, c. 1460; in the Staatliche Museen Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin.
Staatliche Museen Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin
In 1442 Lippi had been made rector of the church of San Quirico at Legnaia.
His life, however, was eventful, and tradition has given him the reputation (borne out in great part by documents) of a man dominated by love affairs and impatient of methodical or tranquil conduct.
His adventures culminated in 1456 in his romantic flight from Prato - where he was painting in the convent of the nuns of Santa Margherita - with a young nun of the convent, Lucrezia Buti.
From 1456 to 1458 Lippi lived with Lucrezia, her sister, and a few other nuns.
Lippi’s conduct, together with his apparent inability to fulfill contracts in time, got him in trouble.
He was arrested, tried, and tortured.
It was only thanks to the intervention of Cosimo de’ Medici that Lippi was released and allowed to renounce his vows.
The pope later gave permission for the former priest-painter and the nun to marry, and from this union was born a son, Filippo, called Filippino, who was to be a noted Florentine painter in the second half of the 15th century.
The bright and active city of Prato, a short distance from Florence, was the second home of Filippo Lippi.
He returned to Prato often, staying there for long periods, painting frescoes and altarpieces.
Accompanied by Fra Diamante, who had been his companion and collaborator since he was a young man, Lippi began to redecorate the walls of the choir of the cathedral there in 1452.
He returned in 1463 and again in 1464, remaining in the city this time until 1467.
At the centre of his activity in Prato stand the frescoes in the chancel of the cathedral, with the four Evangelists and scenes from the lives of St. John the Baptist and St. Stephen.
Perhaps the most solemn scene of the life and death of St. Stephen is the burial; at the sides of the funeral bed of the saint stand a crowd of prelates and illustrious persons in mourning, among them Cardinal Carlo de’ Medici, Fra Diamante, and the artist himself.
In 1467 Lippi, his son Filippino, and Fra Diamante left for Spoleto, where Lippi had received a commission for another vast undertaking: the decorations and frescoes of the choir of the cathedral, which included the Nativity, the Annunciation, the Death of Mary, and - in the centre of the vault of the apse - the Coronation.
These frescoes were Lippi’s final work; they were interrupted by his death, for which there are two documented dates - in the monks’ necrology of Santa Maria del Carmine in Florence and in the archives of Spoleto.
Later the Medici had a splendid sepulchre, designed by Lippi’s son, erected for him (1490) in the cathedral of Spoleto.
PIERO DELLA FRANCESCA (b. c. 1416/17, Sansepolcro, republic of Florence - d.
Oct. 12, 1492, Sansepolcro)
The documented facts of Piero della Francesca’s life, which are few, permit a reasonably accurate reconstruction of his career and interests but not an exact chronology of his surviving paintings.
His father was apparently prosperous enough for his son (christened Piero di Benedetto dei Franceschi) to become well educated and literate in Latin.
Nothing is known about Piero’s early training as a painter, though it is assumed that he was instructed by local masters who had been influenced by Sienese art.
EARLY CAREER
In 1439 Piero worked as an associate of Domenico Veneziano, who was then painting frescoes for the hospital of Sta.
Maria Nuova in Florence, where the early Renaissance style was beginning to flourish.
In Florence he probably studied the statuary of Donatello and Luca della Robbia, the buildings of Filippo Brunelleschi, and the paintings of Masaccio and Fra Angelico.
<Caption> The Baptism of Christ, panel painting by Piero della Francesca, c. 1440–45; in the National Gallery, London.
Courtesy of the trustees of the National Gallery, London; photograph, A.C. Cooper Ltd.
Back in Sansepolcro by 1442, Piero was elected to the town council.
Three years later the Confraternita della Misericordia commissioned a polyptych from him.
The Misericordia Altarpiece shows Piero’s indebtedness to the Florentines Donatello and Masaccio, his fondness for geometric form, and the slowness and deliberation with which he habitually worked - for the Misericordia Altarpiece was not completed until 1462.
Periodic retreat to the provincial isolation of Sansepolcro seems to have been necessary for Piero’s work.
For the rest of his life he alternated between the calm of Sansepolcro and contact with the humanistic life of the Renaissance in artistic and intellectual centres such as Ferrara and Rimini.
Around 1448 Piero probably worked in the service of Marchese Leonello d’Este in Ferrara, where he may have been influenced by northern Italian art.
To this early formative period before belongs The Baptism of Christ.
This painting exhibits the elements that remained a constant in Piero’s style to his death.
The vigorous volume of the figures, the spatial definition, and, above all, the very original use of colour and light - his paintings appear almost “bleached” - define a style that has all the elements of the Renaissance but that remained one of the most original of all times.
MATURE PERIOD
Piero della Francesca’s mature style is revealed in frescoes painted in the choir of the church of S. Francesco at Arezzo.
The decorations had been begun in 1447 by the elderly Bicci di Lorenzo, who died in 1452.
Piero presumably was retained to complete the work shortly thereafter.
The narrative cycle, depicting The Legend of the True Cross, was completed by 1466.
Its simplicity and clarity of structure, controlled use of perspective, and aura of serenity are all typical of Piero’s art at its best.
Contemporary with the Arezzo cycle are a fresco of the Magdalen in Arezzo cathedral, the Resurrection in the Palazzo Comunale at Sansepolcro, and a Madonna del Parto in the chapel of the cemetery at Monterchi.
In 1454 a burgher of Sansepolcro, Agnolo di Giovanni di Simone d’Angelo, commissioned an altarpiece for S. Agostino that Piero, characteristically, did not complete until 1469.
The surviving panels of the altarpiece reveal Piero’s interest in the creation of monumental human figures through the sculptural use of line and light.
In 1459 Piero was in Rome to paint frescoes (now destroyed) for Pope Pius II in the Vatican.
St. Luke, executed at the same time, was probably done by assistants in the studio he had established in Rome.
More fruitful was Piero’s long association with Count (later Duke) Federico da Montefeltro, whose highly cultured court in Urbino was considered “the light of Italy.”
In the late 1450s Piero painted the Flagellation of Christ, the intended location of which is still debated by scholars.
Its lucid perspectival construction contrasts with treatment of the subject wherein Christ is relegated to the background while three unidentified figures dominate the foreground.
The content of the picture has indeed become the focus of modern academic controversy.
A famous diptych portrait of Duke Federico and his consort, Battista Sforza, was probably begun to commemorate their marriage in 1465.
The paintings show Piero’s respect for visual fact in the unidealized features of the duke and in the enchanting landscape backgrounds, which also indicate that he had discovered Netherlandish painting.
The reverse depicts the couple in a triumphal procession accompanied by the Virtues.
The duke reappears as a kneeling donor in an altarpiece from S. Bernardino, Urbino.
He, the Madonna and her child, and accompanying saints are placed before the apse (semicircular choir) of a magnificent Albertian church.
The painting, dated between 1472 and 1474, may have been a memorial to Countess Battista, who died after giving birth to the couple’s ninth child and first son.
The altarpiece is one of the most accomplished Renaissance presentations of forms in space.
LAST YEARS
The last two decades of Piero’s life were spent in Sansepolcro, where paintings, now lost, were commissioned by local churches in 1474 and 1478.
In his old age Piero seems to have abandoned painting in favour of more abstruse pursuits.
Between 1474 and 1482 he wrote a treatise on painting, De prospectiva pingendi (“On Perspective in Painting”), dedicated to his patron, the duke of Urbino.
The principal manuscript was handwritten by the artist himself and illuminated by him with diagrams on geometric, proportional, and perspectival problems.
A second treatise, the De quinque corporibus regularibus (“On the Five Regular Bodies”), written some time after 1482, follows Plato and Pythagoras in dealing with the notion of perfect proportions.
GIOVANNI BELLINI (b. c. 1430, Venice - d.
1516, Venice)
Little is known about Bellini’s family.
His father, Jacopo, a painter, was a pupil of Gentile da Fabriano, one of the leading painters of the early 15th century, and may have followed him to Florence.
In any case, Jacopo introduced the principles of the Florentine Renaissance to Venice before either of his sons.
Apart from his sons Gentile and Giovanni, he had at least one daughter, Niccolosa, who married the painter Andrea Mantegna in 1453.
Both sons probably began as assistants in their father’s workshop.
Giovanni’s earliest independent paintings were influenced by the late Gothic graceful style of his father, Jacopo, and by the severe manner of the Paduan school, and especially of his brother-in-law, Mantegna.
This influence is evident even after Mantegna left for the court of Mantua in 1460.
Giovanni’s earliest works date from before this period.
They include a Crucifixion, a Transfiguration, and a Dead Christ Supported by Angels.
His early work is well exemplified in two beautiful paintings, The Blood of the Redeemer and The Agony in the Garden.
In all his early pictures he worked with tempera, combining the severity and rigidity of the Paduan school with a depth of religious feeling and human pathos all his own.
His early Madonnas, following in his father’s tradition, are mostly sweet in expression, but he substituted for a mainly decorative richness one drawn more from a sensuous observation of nature.
Although the pronounced linear element - i.e.,
the dominance of line rather than mass as a means of defining form, derived from the Florentine tradition and from the precocious Mantegna - is evident in the paintings, the line is less self-conscious than Mantegna’s work, and, from the first, broadly sculptured planes offer their surfaces to the light from a dramatically brilliant sky.
From the beginning Giovanni Bellini was a painter of natural light, as were Masaccio, the founder of Renaissance painting, and Piero della Francesca, its greatest practitioner at that time.
In these earliest pictures the sky is apt to be reflected behind the figures in streaks of water making horizontal lines in a mere strip of landscape.
In The Agony in the Garden (c. 1465), the horizon moves up, and a deep, wide landscape encloses the figures, to play an equal part in expressing the drama of the scene.
As with the dramatis personae, the elaborately linear structure of the landscape provides much of the expression, but an even greater part is played by the colours of the dawn, in their full brilliance and in the reflected light within the shadow.
This is the first of a great series of Venetian landscape scenes that was to develop continuously for a century or more.
To a city surrounded by water, the emotional value of landscape was now fully revealed.
A comparison with Mantegna’s treatment of the same subject matter reveals the subtle yet fundamental differences in the styles of the two masters.
The great composite altarpiece with St. Vincent Ferrer, which is still in the church of Saints Giovanni e Paolo in Venice, was painted perhaps 10 years later, toward the mid-1470s.
But the principles of composition and the method of painting had not yet changed essentially; they had merely grown stronger in expression.
It seems to have been during a voyage down the Adriatic coast, made probably not long afterward, that Bellini encountered the influence that must have helped him most toward his full development: that of Piero della Francesca.
Bellini’s great Coronation of the Virgin at Pesaro, for example, might have reflected some of the compositional elements of Piero’s lost Coronation of the Virgin, painted as the central panel of a polyptych.
Christ’s crowning of his mother beneath the effulgence of the Holy Ghost is a solemn act of consecration, and the four saints who stand witness beside the throne are characterized by their deep humanity.
Every quality of their forms is fully realized: every aspect of their bodies, the textures of their garments, and the objects that they hold.
As with work by Masaccio and Piero della Francesca, the perspective of pavement and throne helps to establish the group in space, and the space is enlarged by the great hills behind and rendered infinite by the luminosity of the sky, which envelops the scene and gathers all the forms together into one.
At this time in his life, Giovanni Bellini also met Antonello da Messina, who traveled to Venice about 1475.
The encounter was to prove influential for both painters.
The changes in Giovanni’s work from his earlier, Mantegnesque style to the more mature, independent, and versatile manner of his later works are already visible in the San Giobbe Altarpiece.
It is the painter’s way of using the medium that makes the difference, and that depends upon his intentions and his vision.
It was Bellini’s richer and broader vision that determined his future development.
Unlike tempera paint, which was the medium of Bellini’s early career, oil paint is inclined to be the more transparent and fusible and therefore lends itself to richer colour and tone by allowing a further degree of glazing, the laying of one translucent layer of colour over another.
This technique and the unprecedented variety with which Bellini handled the oil paint give his fully mature painting the richness associated with the Venetian school.
Giovanni’s brother, Gentile, was chosen by the government to continue the painting of great historical scenes in the hall of the Great Council in Venice; but in 1479, when Gentile was sent on a mission to Constantinople, Giovanni took his place.
From that time to 1480, much of Giovanni’s time and energy was devoted to fulfilling his duties as conservator of the paintings in the hall, as well as painting six or seven new canvases himself.
These were his greatest works, but they were destroyed when the huge hall was gutted by fire in 1577.
Contemporary students of his work can now gain only an approximate idea of their design from The Martyrdom of St. Mark in the Scuola di San Marco in Venice, finished and signed by one of Giovanni’s assistants, and of their execution from Giovanni’s completion of Gentile’s St. Mark Preaching in Alexandria after his brother’s death in Venice in 1507.
Yet a surprisingly large number of big altarpieces and comparatively portable works have survived and show the steady but adventurous evolution of his work.
The principles and the technique of the Pesaro Altarpiece find their full development in the still-larger altarpiece of the Madonna from San Giobbe in the Venice Accademia, where the Virgin enthroned in a great apse and the saints beside her seem ready to melt into the reflected light.
This seems to have been painted before the earliest of his dated pictures, the half-length Madonna degli Alberetti (1487), also in the Venice Accademia.
While for the first 20 years of Giovanni’s career he limited his subject matter mainly to traditional religious subjects (Madonnas, Pietàs, and Crucifixions), toward the end of the century it began to be greatly enriched not so much by the wider choice of subjects as by the development of the mise-en-scène, the physical setting of the picture.
He became one of the greatest of landscape painters.
His study of outdoor light was such that one can deduce not only the season depicted but almost the hour of the day.
Bellini also excelled as a painter of ideal scenes - i.e.,
scenes of primeval as opposed to individualized images.
For the St. Francis in Ecstasy of the Frick Collection or the St. Jerome at His Meditations, painted for the high altar of Santa Maria dei Miracoli in Venice, the anatomy of the earth is studied as carefully as those of human figures; but the purpose of this naturalism is to convey idealism through the realistic portrayal of detail.
In the landscape Sacred Allegory, he created the first of the dreamy enigmatic scenes for which Giorgione, his pupil, was to become famous.
The same quality of idealism is to be found in his portraiture.
His Doge Leonardo Loredan has all the wise and kindly firmness of the perfect head of state, and his Portrait of a Young Man (c. 1505) portrays all the sensitivity of a poet.
Both artistically and personally, Giovanni Bellini seems to have been serene and prosperous.
He lived to see his own school of painting achieve dominance and acclaim.
He saw his influence propagated by a host of pupils, two of whom surpassed their master in world fame: Giorgione, whom he outlived by six years, and Titian.
ANDREA MANTEGNA (b. 1431, Isola di Cartura [near Vicenza], Republic of Venice - d.
Sept. 13, 1506, Mantua)
Andrea Mantegna’s extraordinary native abilities were recognized early.
He was legally adopted by painting teacher and collector of antiquities Francesco Squarcione by the time he was 10 years old and possibly even earlier.
Squarcione drew the cream of young local talent to his studio, which some of his protégés, including Mantegna, later had cause to regret.
In 1448, at age 17, Mantegna disassociated himself from Squarcione’s guardianship to establish his own workshop in Padua, later claiming that Squarcione had profited considerably from his services without giving due recompense.
The award to Mantegna of the important commission for an altarpiece for the church of Santa Sofia (1448), now lost, demonstrates his precocity, since it was unusual for so young an artist to receive such a commission.
Mantegna himself proudly called attention to his youthful ability in the painting’s inscription: “Andrea Mantegna from Padua, aged 17, painted this with his own hand, 1448.”
INDEPENDENCE AND EARLY YEARS
During the following year (1449), Mantegna worked on the fresco decoration of the Ovetari Chapel in the Eremitani Church in Padua.
The figures of Saints Peter, Paul, and Christopher in the apse, his earliest frescoes in this chapel, show to what extent he had already absorbed the monumental figure style of Tuscany.
In the St. James Led to Martyrdom in the lowest row on the left wall, painted sometime between 1453 and 1455, both Mantegna’s mastery of di sotto in su (from below to above) perspective and his use of archaeologically correct details of Roman architecture are already apparent.
The perspective scheme with a viewpoint below the lower frame of the composition exaggerates the apparent height of the scene with respect to the viewer and lends an aspect of grandiose monumentality to the triumphal arch.
In the two scenes from the life of St. Christopher united in a single perspective on the right-hand wall, Mantegna extended his experiments in illusionism to the framing element by painting a highly realistic column on the front plane.
The meticulously detailed column divides the scene in two while appearing to exist in a realm totally apart from the pictorial space, a realm shared with the observer.
This extension of illusionistic principles to the elements surrounding a picture anticipates Mantegna’s San Zeno altarpiece, where the carved half columns of the frame abut the painted piers (vertical members) on the front plane of the picture space, so that the frame architecture serves as the exterior of the temple-pavilion architecture depicted in the painting.
In this way the sphere of intense ideality inhabited by the Virgin Mary is conjoined to the beholder’s own space by a brilliant combination of physical and optical devices.
Unfortunately, all Mantegna’s frescoes in the Ovetari Chapel except The Assumption and The Martyrdom of St. Christopher were destroyed by a bomb during World War II.
The environment of the city of Padua, where Mantegna lived during the major formative years of his life (from about age 10 to about age 30), exerted a strong influence on his interests, ideas, painting style, and concept of himself.
Padua was the first centre of humanism in northern Italy, the home of a great university (founded in 1222), and renowned as a centre for the study of medicine, philosophy, and mathematics.
With the influx of scholars from all over Europe and Italy, an atmosphere of internationalism prevailed.
From the time of the 14th-century poet Petrarch, Padua had experienced a rapidly growing revival of interest in antiquity, and many eminent humanists and Latin scholars had resided there.
Increasing interest in and imitation of the culture of ancient Rome produced a climate in which feverish collecting of antiquities and ancient inscriptions - even if only in fragmentary form - flourished.
Mantegna’s friendly relations with several humanists, antiquarians, and university professors are a matter of record, and hence he may be seen as one of the earliest Renaissance artists to fraternize from a position of intellectual equality with such men.
In this way, Mantegna’s lifestyle contributed to the early 16th-century ideal of the artist as one so intimately familiar with antique history, mythology, and literature as to be able to draw easily from these highly respected sources.
The experience of the Paduan milieu was thus decisive for the formation of Mantegna’s attitude toward the classical world, which may perhaps be characterized best as double faceted.
On the one hand, Mantegna’s search for accurate knowledge of Roman antiquity was reflected both in his depiction of specific monuments of Roman architecture and sculpture and in his creation of a vocabulary of antique forms that became the language of antique revival for more than a generation of northern Italian painters and sculptors after the mid-1450s.
On the other hand, through a process of artistic synthesis, Mantegna sensed the forces and significances below the surfaces of Roman grandeur.
The architectural backgrounds of pictures in the Ovetari Chapel, such as the St. James Before Herod and the St. James Led to Martyrdom, as well as of the two paintings of St. Sebastian in Vienna and Paris, were infused with a brooding harshness and severity against which the suffering of the Christian saints took on the added tragic implication of an impending cultural clash that was to separate and alienate the Christian and pagan worlds.
In Mantegna’s century, overcoming the experience of alienation from antiquity through the study and revitalization of its architectural and sculptural vocabulary was an obsessive theme.
That the Roman world still existed in Italy in ruins only served to increase the sudden sense of cultural loss that struck the 15th century.
By his thoroughgoing description of antique forms coupled with an instinctive sense of the political realities that underlay their original creation, Mantegna lent great impetus to the antique revival movement at mid-century.
Mantegna’s starting point had been a still earlier form of antique revival - the monumental Tuscan figure style brought to Venice by the Florentine painter Andrea del Castagno in 1442.
Mantegna presumably saw Castagno’s frescoes of evangelists and saints in the church of San Zaccaria during a visit to Venice in 1447.
His Venetian connections were strengthened by his marriage in 1453 to Nicolosia, daughter of Jacopo Bellini and sister of Giovanni and Gentile Bellini, who became the leading family of painters in Venice during the following decade.
Jacopo’s studies in perspective and drawings of fantastic architectural settings based on antique architecture would have interested his new son-in-law, who very likely had studied such drawings during his earlier visit to Venice.
Though Mantegna might have been expected to join the Bellini studio, he preferred to pursue his independent practice in Padua, where the overwhelming artistic influence on him for the preceding few years had come from the wealth of sculpture produced by the Florentine Donatello for the high altar of San Antonio (finished by 1450).
Giovanni Bellini’s response to Mantegna’s style has been termed a dialogue, but Mantegna’s reaction to Donatello’s works might more aptly be called a struggle or even a dialectic.
The frame and painted architecture of Mantegna’s San Zeno altarpiece (1459) answered the challenge posed by Donatello’s Padua altar, for example.
Mantegna’s art always retained echoes of Donatello’s sculpture in its hard, even metallic, surfaces, revealing an essentially sculptural approach that was somewhat softened only in the 1490s.
YEARS AS A COURT PAINTER IN MANTUA
Mantegna has been characterized as strongly jealous of his independence; yet by entering the service of the marchese di Montova (Mantua), Ludovico Gonzaga, in 1459, he was forced to submit to limitations on his freedom of travel and acceptance of commissions from other patrons.
Despite such restrictions, Mantegna journeyed to Florence and Pisa in 1466–67, where he renewed contact with works of art by Donatello, Fra Filippo Lippi, Paolo Uccello, and Andrea del Castagno.
During this decade (1460–70), Mantegna produced his finest small-scale works, such as The Circumcision and the Venice St. George.
The Gonzaga patronage provided Mantegna a fixed income (which did not always materialize) and the opportunity to create what became his best-known surviving work, the so-called Camera degli Sposi work by Mantegna in the Palazzo Ducale at Mantua.
Earlier practitioners of 15th-century perspective delimited a rectangular field as a transparent window onto the world and constructed an imaginary space behind its front plane.
In the Camera degli Sposi, however, Mantegna constructed a system of homogeneous decoration on all four walls of the room, mainly by means of highly realistic painted architectural elements on walls and ceilings, which from ground level convincingly imitate three-dimensionally extended shapes.
Though the ceiling is flat, it appears concave.
Mantegna transformed the small interior room into an elegant open-air pavilion, to which the room’s real and fictive occupants (actually one and the same, since the beholders must have been members of that very court) were transported from deep within an essentially medieval urban castle.
Directly above the centre of the room is a painted oculus, or circular opening to the sky, with putti (nude, chubby child figures) and women around a balustrade in dramatically foreshortened perspective.
The strong vertical axis created by the oculus locates the spectator at a single point in the centre of the room, the point from which the observer’s space blends with that of the frescoed figures.
The realism of the perspective handling of the oculus made it the most influential illusionistic di sotto in su ceiling decoration of the early Renaissance.
Its implications for the future of ceiling decoration were largely unrealized, however, until the time of Correggio, a major northern Italian painter of the early 16th century, who employed the same type of illusionism in a series of domes in Parma (Italy).
Furthermore, the idea of total spatial illusion generated by Mantegna was not fully exploited until inventors of ingenious schemes of ceiling decoration in the Baroque era (the 17th century), such as Giovanni Lanfranco and Andrea Pozzo, utilized a basically identical concept of total illusion dependent upon the location of a hypothetical viewer standing at a single point in the room.
While at the Gonzaga court, Mantegna attained a position of great respect.
His close relations with his patron Ludovico were a unique phenomenon at such an early date.
As one might expect, the signatures of Mantegna’s paintings reveal intense pride in his accomplishments as a painter.
Other than that there are only a few legal records of disputes with his neighbours (from which Ludovico had to rescue him) to provide tentative evidence for the painter’s irascible and contentious personality during his later years.
An empathetic viewer may draw many subjective conclusions as to Mantegna’s thoughts and emotions by looking carefully at his paintings.
<Caption> Madonna of the Victory, altarpiece by Andrea Mantegna, 1496; in the Louvre, Paris.
Giraudon/Art Resource, New York
Ludovico died in 1478, followed soon after by Mantegna’s son Bernardino, who had been expected to carry on his father’s studio.
Mantegna’s financial situation was so bad that, in 1484, he was forced to ask for help from the powerful Florentine merchant prince Lorenzo de’ Medici and even contemplated moving to Florence.
But Ludovico’s son Federico outlived his father by only a few years, and, with the accession of young Francesco II in 1484, the financial conditions of patronage improved.
Though many of Mantegna’s works for the Gonzaga family were subsequently lost, the remains of nine canvases depicting a Roman triumphal procession, the Triumph of Caesar, begun about 1486 and worked on for several years, still exist.
In these paintings, reflecting the classical tastes of his new patron, Francesco, Mantegna reached the peak of his late style.
Perhaps it was this new imaginative synthesis of the colour, splendour, and ritualistic power of ancient Rome that brought about Pope Innocent VIII’s commission to decorate his private chapel in the Belvedere Palace in Rome (destroyed 1780), which Mantegna carried out in 1488–90.
Notwithstanding ill health and advanced age, Mantegna worked intensively during the remaining years of his life.
In 1495 Francesco ordered the Madonna of the Victory (1496) to commemorate his supposed victory at the Battle of Fornovo.
In the last years of his life, Mantegna painted the Parnassus (1497), a picture celebrating the marriage of Isabella d’Este to Francesco Gonzaga in 1490, and Wisdom Overcoming the Vices (1502) for Isabella’s studiolo (a small room in the Gonzaga palace at Mantua embellished with fine paintings and carvings of mythological subjects intended to display the erudition and advanced taste of its patron).
A third canvas intended for this program, with the legend of the god Comus, was unfinished when Mantegna died and was completed by his successor at the Gonzaga court, Lorenzo Costa.
A funerary chapel in the church of S. Andrea at Mantua was dedicated to Mantegna’s memory.
Decorated with frescoes, including a dome painted (possibly by Correggio) with paradise symbols related to Mantegna’s Madonna of the Victory, it was finished in 1516.
No other 15th-century artist was dignified by having a funerary chapel dedicated to him in the major church of the city where he worked, which attests to the high stature Mantegna came to enjoy in his adopted city.
SANDRO BOTTICELLI (b. 1445, Florence - d.
May 17, 1510, Florence)
Sandro Botticelli was born Alessandro di Mariano Filipepi.
The name Botticelli is derived from that of his elder brother Giovanni, a pawnbroker who was called Botticello (“The Little Barrel”).
Initially apprenticed to a goldsmith, Botticelli preferred painting and was placed in the studio of the much-admired Filippo Lippi.
PAINTING APPRENTICESHIP AND EARLY CAREER
Lippi’s painterly style, which was formed in the early Florentine Renaissance, was fundamental to Botticelli’s own artistic formation, and his influence is evident even in his pupil’s late works.
Stylistically, Botticelli acquired from Lippi a repertory of types and compositions, a certain graceful fancifulness in costuming, a linear sense of form, and a partiality to certain paler hues that is still visible even after Botticelli had developed his own strong and resonant colour schemes.
ANDREA DEL VERROCCHIO
The Florentine sculptor and painter Andrea del Verrocchio (1435–88) was initially trained as a goldsmith, but little else about his early life has been established with certainty.
It is assumed that he and Sandro Botticelli worked together under the early Renaissance master Fra Filippo Lippi in Prato, a city near Florence.
Verrocchio’s most important works, both paintings and sculptures, were executed in the last two decades of his life.
His rise to artistic prominence, which he owed chiefly to the patronage of Piero de’ Medici and his son Lorenzo, evidently began only after the death, in 1466, of Donatello, who had been the Medici favourite.
In the early 1480s Verrocchio moved to Venice.
Verrocchio’s reputation was widespread in the second half of the 15th century and many well-known artists of the Italian Renaissance studied painting and sculpture at his Florentine studio.
The most important of his students were Leonardo da Vinci and Perugino, the latter Raphael’s teacher.
After Lippi left Florence for Spoleto, Botticelli studied the sculptural style of Antonio Pollaiuolo and Andrea del Verrocchio, and under their influence he produced figures of sculptural roundness and strength.
He also replaced Lippi’s delicate approach with a robust and vigorous naturalism, shaped always by conceptions of ideal beauty.
Already by 1470 Botticelli was established in Florence as an independent master with his own workshop.
Absorbed in his art, he never married, and he lived with his family.
These transitions in Botticelli’s style can be seen in the small panels of Judith (The Return of Judith) and Holofernes (The Discovery of the Body of Holofernes), both c. 1470, and in his first dated work, Fortitude (1470).
Botticelli’s art from that time shows a use of ochre in the shadowed areas of flesh tones that gives a brown warmth much different from Lippi’s pallor.
About 1478–81 Botticelli entered his artistic maturity.
During this period all tentativeness in his work disappeared and was replaced by a consummate mastery.
He was able to integrate figure and setting into harmonious compositions and to draw the human form with a compelling vitality.
He would later display unequaled skill at rendering narrative texts, whether biographies of saints or stories from Boccaccio’s Decameron or Dante’s Divine Comedy, into a pictorial form that is at once exact, economical, and eloquent.
DEVOTIONAL PAINTINGS
Botticelli worked in all the current genres of Florentine art.
He painted altarpieces in fresco and on panel, tondi (round paintings), small panel pictures, and small devotional triptychs.
His altarpieces include narrow vertical panels such as the St. Sebastian (1474); small oblong panels such as the famous Adoration of the Magi (c. 1476) from the Church of Santa Maria Novella; medium-sized altarpieces, of which the finest is the beautiful Bardi Altarpiece (1484–85); and large-scale works such as the St. Barnabas Altarpiece (c. 1488) and the Coronation of the Virgin (c. 1490).
His early mastery of fresco is clearly visible in his St. Augustine (1480) in the Church of Ognissanti, in which the saint’s cogent energy and vigour express both intellectual power and spiritual devotion.
Three of Botticelli’s finest religious frescoes (completed 1482) were part of the decorations of the Sistine Chapel undertaken by a team of Florentine and Umbrian artists who had been summoned to Rome in July 1481.
The theological themes of the frescoes were chosen to illustrate papal supremacy over the church; Botticelli’s are remarkable for their brilliant fusion of sequences of symbolic episodes into unitary compositions.
<Caption> Detail from Botticelli’s Adoration of the Magi.
Botticelli is believed to have included a self-portrait within the work; he is the man gazing directly at the viewer.
The Bridgeman Art Library/Getty Images
Florentine tondi were often large, richly framed paintings, and Botticelli produced major works in this format, beginning with the Adoration of the Magi (c. 1473) that he painted for Antonio Pucci.
Before Botticelli, tondi had been conceived essentially as oblong scenes, but Botticelli suppressed all superfluity of detail in them and became adept at harmonizing his figures with the circular form.
His complete mastery of the tondo format is evident in two of his most beautiful paintings, The Madonna of the Magnificat (1482) and The Madonna of the Pomegranate (c. 1487).
SECULAR PATRONAGE AND WORKS
Botticelli is the earliest European artist whose paintings of secular historical subjects survive in some number and are equal or superior in importance to his religious paintings.
Nevertheless, much of his secular work is lost; from a working life of some 40 years, only eight examples by him survive in an already well-established genre, the portrait.
One of these, the portrait of a young man holding a medal of Cosimo de’ Medici (c. 1474), is especially significant because in it Botticelli copied the Flemish painter Hans Memling’s recently invented device of setting the figure before a landscape seen from a high vantage point.
This is the earliest instance of the influence on Botticelli of contemporary Flemish landscape art, which is clearly visible in a number of his landscape settings.
Perhaps it was Botticelli’s skill in portraiture that gained him the patronage of the Medici family, in particular of Lorenzo de’ Medici and his brother Giuliano, and, later, that of Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de’ Medici, head of the younger Medici line.
Botticelli painted a portrait of Giuliano and posthumous portraits of his grandfather Cosimo and father Piero.
Portraits of all four Medici appear as the Three Magi and an attendant figure in the Adoration of the Magi from Santa Maria Novella.
After Giuliano de’ Medici’s assassination in the Pazzi conspiracy of 1478, it was Botticelli who painted the defamatory fresco of the hanged conspirators on a wall of the Palazzo Vecchio.
The frescoes were destroyed after the expulsion of the Medici in 1494.
MYTHOLOGICAL PAINTINGS
Many of the commissions given to Botticelli by these rich patrons were linked to Florentine customs on the occasion of a marriage, which was by far the most important family ceremony of that time.
A chamber was usually prepared for the newly married couple in the family palace of the groom, and paintings were mounted within it.
The themes of such paintings were either romantic, exalting love and lovers, or exemplary, depicting heroines of virtuous fame.
Botticelli’s earliest known work of this kind was commissioned in 1483.
The set of four panels - The Story of Nastagio degli Onesti - narrates a story from Boccaccio.
Mythological figures had been used in earlier Renaissance secular art, but the complex culture of late Medicean Florence, which was simultaneously infused with the romantic sentiment of courtly love and with the humanist interest for classical antiquity and its vanished artistic traditions, employed these mythological figures more fully and in more correctly antiquarian fashion.
A new mythological language became current, inspired partly by classical literature and sculpture and by descriptions of lost ancient paintings and partly by the Renaissance search for the full physical realization of the ideal human figure.
Among the greatest examples of this novel fashion in secular painting are four of Botticelli’s most famous works: Primavera (c. 1477–82), Pallas and the Centaur (c. 1485), Venus and Mars (c. 1485), and The Birth of Venus (c. 1485).
All four of these panel paintings have been variously interpreted by modern scholarship.
The figures certainly do not enact a known myth but rather are used allegorically to illustrate various aspects of love: in Primavera, its kindling and its fruition in marriage; in Pallas, the subjugation of male lust by female chastity; in Venus and Mars, a celebration of woman’s calm triumph after man’s sexual exhaustion; and in The Birth of Venus, the birth of love in the world.
The Primavera and The Birth of Venus contain some of the most sensuously beautiful nudes and semi-nudes painted during the Renaissance.
The four paintings’ settings, which are partly mythological - that of the Primavera is the Garden of the Hesperides - and partly symbolic, are pastoral and idyllic in sentiment.
LATE WORKS
An incipient mannerism appears in Botticelli’s late works of the 1480s and in works such as the magnificent Cestello Annunciation (1490) and the small Pietà (late 1490s).
After the early 1490s his style changed markedly.
The paintings are smaller in scale, the figures in them are now slender to the point of idiosyncrasy, and the painter, by accentuating their gestures and expressions, concentrates attention on their passionate urgency of action.
This mysterious retreat from the idealizing naturalism of the 1480s perhaps resulted from Botticelli’s involvement with the fiery reformist preacher Girolamo Savonarola in the 1490s.
The years from 1494 were dramatic ones in Florence: its Medici rulers fell, and a republican government under Savonarola’s dominance was installed.
Savonarola was an ascetic idealist who attacked the church’s corruption and prophesied its future renewal.
According to Vasari, Botticelli took an enduring interest in the study and interpretation of Dante’s Divine Comedy.
He made some designs to illustrate the first printed edition of 1481 and worked intermittently over the following years on an uncompleted set of large drawings that matched each canto with a complete visual commentary.
He was also much in demand by engravers, embroiderers, and tapestry workers as a designer.
Among his few surviving drawings are some that can be associated with these techniques.
DOMENICO GHIRLANDAIO (b. 1449, Florence - d.
Jan. 11, 1494, Florence)
Domenico di Tommaso Bigordi was the son of a goldsmith, and his nickname, Ghirlandaio, was derived from his father’s skill in making garlands for the hair of Florentine women.
Domenico probably began as an apprentice in his father’s shop, but almost nothing is known about his training as a painter or the beginnings of his career.
The earliest works attributed to him, dating from the early 1470s, show strong influences from the frescoes of Andrea del Castagno, who died when Ghirlandaio was about eight years old.
Vasari records in his Lives that Ghirlandaio was a pupil of the Florentine painter Alesso Baldovinetti, even though Baldovinetti was only four or five years older than Ghirlandaio himself.
Ghirlandaio preferred to work in fresco on large wall surfaces, but he used smaller-scale paintings executed on wood panels for the altarpieces of the chapels that housed his fresco cycles.
<Caption> The Last Supper, fresco by Domenico Ghirlandaio, 1480; in the Church of Ognissanti, Florence.
SCALA/Art Resource, New York
The village church of Cercina, near Florence, has a fresco of three saints, now thought to be Ghirlandaio’s earliest work, but there is general agreement that some frescoes in the Church of Ognissanti in Florence, almost certainly dating from 1472–73, show his style at its earliest developed stage.
One of them, the Pietà, depicts several members of the Vespucci family as mourners, thus already introducing Ghirlandaio’s characteristic combination of portrait figures in contemporary dress with religious subjects.
Something of the passion for minute detail shown by the early Flemish painters can be found in Ghirlandaio’s work of this period.
His fresco St. Jerome in His Study (1480) may even be an enlarged version in fresco of an oil painting by the Flemish painter Jan van Eyck, which had found its way to Florence.
The St. Jerome fresco is particularly important because it is a companion piece to one of St. Augustine by Ghirlandaio’s Florentine contemporary Sandro Botticelli.
Ghirlandaio’s first major commissioned works were the two frescoes depicting scenes from the life of St. Fina, painted in 1475 in the Chapel of Santa Fina in the Collegiata at San Gimignano, near Florence.
Both works derive from Fra Filippo Lippi’s slightly earlier fresco cycle in the cathedral at Prato.
<Caption> The Birth of the Virgin, fresco by Domenico Ghirlandaio, 1486–90; in the choir of Santa Maria Novella, Florence.
SCALA/Art Resource, New York
In 1481–82 Ghirlandaio received an important commission in the Vatican for a fresco, representing the calling of the first Apostles, Peter and Andrew, in the Sistine Chapel.
Its style is reminiscent of the frescoes by Masaccio of about 1427, which had been the great innovating works of the early 15th century in Florence.
The principal feature of this fresco is the group of portraits of the Florentine colony in Rome, who are represented as witnesses of the biblical event.
Ghirlandaio must have used his stay in Rome to study Roman antiquities at first hand, for many details of triumphal arches, ancient sarcophagi, and similar antique elements occur in his works throughout the rest of his career.
Late in his short life, Ghirlandaio and his assistants, including his brothers Davide and Benedetto and his brother-in-law Sebastiano Mainardi, produced two major fresco cycles.
The earlier was executed for the Sassetti Chapel in Santa Trinità in Florence.
Commissioned by Francesco Sassetti, an agent of the Medici bank, they were painted between about 1482 and 1485.
The six main frescoes represent scenes from the life of St. Francis of Assisi, Sassetti’s patron saint.
Once more, the frescoes contain many details of the buildings and customs of the period - for example, the Piazza della Signoria with the Loggia dei Lanzi - and, in particular, there are numerous portraits of members of the Sassetti family shown together with some of the leading members of the Medici family, and of leading members of the Florentine mercantile aristocracy.
The altarpiece, dated 1485, contains further evidence of Ghirlandaio’s interest in classical antiquity, for it shows the Adoration of the Shepherds with a Roman triumphal arch in the background and a Roman sarcophagus in place of the traditional manger.
This painting in tempera has several direct references to contemporary Flemish paintings, especially the enormous Portinari Altarpiece painted in oil by Hugo van der Goes, which had been commissioned in Flanders by Tommaso Portinari, another agent of the Medici bank, and which arrived in Florence in the late 1470s.
Ghirlandaio’s last and greatest fresco cycle was painted for another Medici banker, Giovanni Tornabuoni, and represents scenes from the life of the Virgin and of St. John the Baptist, the patron saint of Florence.
Ghirlandaio signed the contract on Sept. 1, 1485, for these large frescoes on the walls of the choir of Santa Maria Novella in Florence.
Ghirlandaio and his assistants, among whom was probably the young Michelangelo, completed the frescoes by about 1490.
The front panel of the altarpiece was completed by assistants according to Ghirlandaio’s design soon after his death in 1494.
Far more striking than the frescoes of Santa Maria Novella, however, are some of Ghirlandaio’s smaller panel paintings, particularly the simple portrait of Giovanna Tornabuoni (1488).
The portrait representing an old man with his grandchild (c. 1480–90) is perhaps Ghirlandaio’s finest painting, notable for its tenderness and humanity, as well as a simplicity and directness of handling.
PERUGINO (b. c. 1450, Città della Pieve, near Perugia, Romagna - d.
February/March 1523, Fontignano, near Perugia)
Perugino was christened Pietro di Cristoforo Vannucci.
Nothing is known for certain of Perugino’s early training, but he may have been a pupil of the renowned Umbrian Piero della Francesca (c. 1420–92) in Arezzo, in which case he would have been a fellow pupil of one of his most famous contemporaries, Luca Signorelli.
The two men were acquainted, and an occasional influence from Signorelli is visible in Perugino’s work, notably in the direction of an increased hardness of drawing (e.g., Crucifixion and Saints, c. 1480–1500).
In Florence, where Perugino is first recorded in 1472, he almost certainly worked in the shop of the painter and sculptor Andrea del Verrocchio, where the young Leonardo da Vinci was apprenticed.
The first certain work by Perugino is a Saint Sebastian, at Cerqueto, near Perugia.
This fresco (a mural painted on wet plaster with water-soluble pigments) dates from 1478 and is typical of Perugino’s style.
He must have attained a considerable reputation by this time, since he probably worked for Pope Sixtus IV in Rome, 1478–79, on frescoes now lost.
Sixtus IV also employed him to paint a number of the frescoes in the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican Palace.
Completed between 1481 and 1482, three narrative scenes behind the altar were destroyed by Michelangelo in 1535–36 in order to use the space for his fresco of the Last Judgment.
Of the scenes completely by Perugino’s own hand, only the fresco Giving of the Keys to St. Peter has survived.
The simple and lucid arrangement of the composition reveals the centre of narrative action, unlike the frescoes in the same series by the Florentine painter Sandro Botticelli, which, in comparison, appear overcrowded and confused in their narrative focus.
MATURE WORK
From approximately 1490 to 1500, Perugino was at his most productive and at the artistic summit of his career.
Among the finest of his works executed during this time are the Vision of St. Bernard, the Madonna and Saints, the Pietà, and the fresco of the Crucifixion for the Florentine convent of Sta.
Maria Maddalena dei Pazzi.
These works are characterized by ample sculptural figures gracefully posed in simple Renaissance architectural settings, which act as a frame to the images and the narrative.
The harmonious space is tightly controlled in the foreground and middle ground, while the background effect is conversely one of infinite space.
During this period he painted his best known portrait, a likeness of Francesco delle Opere.
Perugino must have been well acquainted with the late 15th-century portraiture of Flanders, since the influence of the Flemish painter Hans Memling is unmistakable.
Commissioned by the guild of bankers of Perugia, Perugino painted a fresco cycle in their Sala dell’Udienza that is believed to have been completed during or shortly after 1500, the date that appears opposite Perugino’s self-portrait in one of the scenes.
The importance of these frescoes lies less in their artistic merit than in the fact that the young Raphael, Perugino’s pupil about 1500, probably was an assistant learning the technique of fresco painting.
An allegorical figure of Fortitude from this series is often attributed to Raphael.
LATE WORK
After 1500 Perugino’s art began to decline, and he frequently repeated his earlier compositions in a routine manner.
The 16th-century biographer and artist Giorgio Vasari wrote that the critical Florentines began to lampoon him, and Perugino replied that they had once praised his work, and, if he now gave the same designs, they had no right to blame him.
It is certainly true that the Combat of Love and Chastity was commissioned in 1503 by Isabella d’Este and was delivered only in 1505, after a great many letters had passed between all concerned, at which time Isabella expressed herself as satisfied but only moderately so.
Perugino left Florence about 1505 and began to work principally for the less critical public of Umbria.
In 1508 he made a temporary comeback by painting roundels on the ceiling of the Stanza dell’Incendio in the Vatican.
The commission for the frescoes on the walls of the room went to his pupil Raphael, who, in the few years after leaving Perugino’s studio, proved himself the greater artist.
One of Perugino’s last commissions was the completion in 1521 of some frescoes in S. Severo, Perugia, which had been begun by Raphael.
He was still painting in February or March 1523 when he died of the plague.
The fresco of the Nativity comes from Fontignano and is generally supposed to be Perugino’s last work.
LEONARDO DA VINCI, THE PAINTER (b. April 15, 1452, Anchiano, near Vinci, republic of Florence - d.
May 2, 1519, Cloux [now Clos-Lucé], France)
The term Renaissance man was coined to describe the multifaceted genius of Leonardo da Vinci.
He was a man of so many accomplishments in so many areas of human endeavour that his like has rarely been seen in human history.
Casual patrons of the arts know him as the painter of the Mona Lisa and the exquisite Last Supper.
These paintings alone would have assured him enduring fame as an artist, but he was also a sculptor, an architect, and a man of science who investigated the natural and physical sciences, mathematics, mechanics, and engineering.
These collateral interests, however, will be deemphasized here, to shed further light on Leonardo the painter.
<Caption> Chalk sketch of Leonardo da Vinci, drawn by the master himself.
A true Renaissance man, da Vinci had many talents in addition to being a painter.
The Bridgeman Art Library/Getty Images
The life of Leonardo da Vinci can be divided into five distinct periods: his childhood and youth in Florence, Italy; his first stay in Milan from 1482 to 1499; the second Florentine period from 1500 to 1506; his second stay in Milan from 1506 to 1513; and his last six years from 1513 to 1519, which were divided equally between Rome and Amboise, France, where he worked for King Francis I.
Leonardo was born, grew up, and was educated on his father’s family estate at Vinci, near Florence.
When he was 15 his father apprenticed him to the artist Andrea del Verrocchio in Florence.
Under Verrocchio he studied painting, sculpture, and the mechanical arts.
In the nearby workshop of the artist Antonio Pollaiuolo he began his interest in anatomy.
Leonardo was accepted into the painters’ guild at Florence in 1472 and remained in the city for the next 10 years.
Even in this early period of his life, Leonardo’s mastery of his art was evident, especially in two unfinished paintings: St. Jerome and The Adoration of the Magi.
There were also a number of pen and pencil drawings that gave evidence of his great skill in sketching.
Many of these drawings were of a technical nature - pumps, military weaponry, and other mechanical apparatus.
FIRST SERVICE IN MILAN
In 1482 Leonardo was hired by the duke of Milan, Ludovico Sforza, to be artist and engineer in residence.
In this capacity he was constantly kept busy as a painter and sculptor, though many of his paintings and all of his sculptures remained unfinished.
He was also frequently consulted by workmen in the fields of architecture, fortifications, and weaponry; and he served as a hydraulic and mechanical engineer.
It was while he was in Milan that the full versatility of his genius began to unfold, and the full range of his interests in the world of humankind and nature in general became evident.
Through his remarkable ability to understand what he saw, he determined to compose a unified theory of the world and to illustrate it in a series of voluminous notebooks.
Unfortunately his relentless pursuit of scientific knowledge forced him to leave unfinished many of his planned artistic creations.
Today they are known primarily from drawings in the notebooks.
In his 17 years in Milan, Leonardo completed only six paintings: two portraits, the Last Supper, two versions of The Virgin of the Rocks, and a decorative ceiling painting in the Castello Sforzesco.
Other commissioned paintings either were not done or have disappeared.
RETURN TO FLORENCE
Ludovico Sforza was driven from power by a French army in 1499.
At the end of the year, or early in 1500, Leonardo returned to his home city after visits to Mantua and Venice.
After his long absence, he was received as an honored and renowned artist.
In Florence, as in Milan, he was commissioned to do a number of paintings, but other interests and tasks kept him from finishing them.
The most notable work to survive from this period was the Mona Lisa.
His largest commission, a huge mural entitled Battle of Anghiari for the Palazzo Vecchio, Florence’s city hall, remained unfinished.
Other technical matters took him away from his art.
For 10 months during 1502, Leonardo served as military adviser and engineer under Cesare Borgia in the latter’s campaign to subdue the Papal States.
He traveled through Borgia’s territories, surveyed them, and made sketches of city plans and topographical maps that laid the groundwork for the field of modern cartography.
Back in Florence in 1503, Leonardo worked on the complicated engineering project of diverting the Arno River around Pisa in order to deprive that city of its access to the sea.
The plan did not work, but it became the basis of a later project (never realized) to build a canal from Florence to the sea.
He also busied himself with dissections of corpses at the hospital of Santa Maria Nuova, made observations on the flight of birds, and continued studies of the properties of water and its currents.
SECOND STAY IN MILAN
In May 1506 Charles d’Amboise, governor of Milan for the king of France, invited Leonardo to return to that city.
His work in painting and sculpture over the next seven years remained mostly in the planning stage - in sketches that he drew but that never became paintings or statues - but his scientific work flourished.
He continued his notebooks with observations and drawings of human anatomy, optics, mechanics, and botanical studies.
LAST YEARS
During the years 1513 to 1516, Leonardo was in Rome at the invitation of Cardinal Giuliano de’ Medici, brother of Pope Leo X. Some of the greatest artists of the time were at work in Rome for the church.
Donato Bramante was building St. Peter’s Basilica; Michelangelo was working on the tomb of Pope Julius; and Raphael was painting the rooms of the pope’s apartments.
Leonardo, on the other hand, was not kept busy.
He executed a map of the Pontine Marshes near Rome, suggesting that perhaps he was involved in a planned reclamation project.
He also did some sketches for a Medici residence in Florence that was never built.
Otherwise he was lonely and unoccupied.
Thus in 1516, at the age of 65, he accepted an invitation from Francis I, king of France, to leave Italy and work for him.
Leonardo spent the last three years of his life in the palace of Cloux, near the king’s residence at Amboise, near Tours.
He was given the title of “first painter, architect, and mechanic of the king” and given freedom of action in what he wanted to do.
His duties were few.
At this point he virtually abandoned painting to concentrate on scientific studies.
He finished the final drafts of his treatise on painting and worked on the study of anatomy.
He also did a variety of sketches, including Visions of the End of the World, that testified to his undiminished ability as an artist.
For the king he drew plans for a palace and garden at Romorantin and made sketches for court festivals.
He was otherwise treated as an honored guest.
Only 17 paintings can definitely be attributed to Leonardo, and not all of them are finished.
Yet he is deservedly considered one of the greatest painters of all time.
He excelled in inventiveness, technique, drawing ability, use of light, shadow, and colour.
ARTISTS OF THE HIGH RENAISSANCE
High Renaissance art flourished for about 35 years, from the early 1490s to 1527, when Rome was sacked by imperial troops.
It revolved around three towering figures: Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Raphael.
Each of the three embodied an important aspect of the period.
The work of these giants of the Renaissance, in addition to the biographies of other important contemporary artists, is profiled in this chapter.
MICHELANGELO, THE PAINTER (b. March 6, 1475, Caprese, Republic of Florence [Italy] - d.
February 18, 1564, Rome, Papal States)
Michelangelo (full name Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni) was considered the greatest living artist in his lifetime, and ever since then he has been held to be one of the greatest artists of all time.
A number of his works in painting, sculpture, and architecture rank among the most famous in existence.
Although the frescoes on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel are probably the best known of his works today, the artist thought of himself primarily as a sculptor.
Here, as with the multitalented Leonardo, the emphasis is placed chiefly on Michelangelo’s career as a painter.
His architectural feats, monumental sculptures, and poetry are largely ignored.
EARLY LIFE AND WORKS
Michelangelo Buonarroti was born to a family that had for several generations belonged to minor nobility in Florence but had, by the time the artist was born, lost its patrimony and status.
Still, it was something of a downward social step to become an artist, and Michelangelo became an apprentice relatively late, at 13, perhaps after overcoming his father’s objections.
He was apprenticed to the city’s most prominent painter, Domenico Ghirlandaio, for a three-year term, but he left after one year, having (his assistant Ascanio Condivi recounts) nothing more to learn.
Several drawings, copies of figures by Ghirlandaio and older great painters of Florence, Giotto and Masaccio, survive from this stage.
Obviously talented, he was taken under the wing of the ruler of the city, Lorenzo de’ Medici.
Lorenzo surrounded himself with poets and intellectuals, and Michelangelo was included.
More important than his contacts with the leading intellectuals of the day was his access to the Medici art collection.
It was this that further stoked his studies of and interest in making sculpture.
Soon after the Medici were overthrown in 1494, Michelangelo left Florence.
In Bologna he was hired to complete some small figures for a grand project, the tomb and shrine of St. Dominic (1494–95).
One commission led to another, and in 1498 he was contracted to create the Pietà and in 1501 the David for the cathedral of Florence, as well as a great many additional works for private individuals.
The Holy Family painted at this time was the artist’s only easel painting.
It was a particularly innovative painting that would later be influential in the development of early Florentine Mannerism.
Its spiraling composition and cold, brilliant colour scheme underline the sculptural intensity of the figures and create a dynamic and expressive effect.
In 1504 he agreed to paint a huge fresco for the Sala del Gran Consiglio of the Florence city hall to form a pair with another just begun by Leonardo da Vinci.
Both murals recorded military victories by the city (Michelangelo’s was the Battle of Cascina), and both works survive only in copies and partial preparatory sketches.
Pope Julius II’s call to Michelangelo to come to Rome spelled an end to both of these Florentine projects and the beginning of several vast projects, including the painting of the Sistine Chapel (1508–12).
THE MIDDLE YEARS: THE SISTINE CHAPEL FRESCOES
The Sistine Chapel had great symbolic meaning for the papacy as the chief consecrated space in the Vatican, used for great ceremonies such as electing and inaugurating new popes.
It already contained distinguished wall paintings, and Michelangelo was asked to add works for the relatively unimportant ceiling.
The Twelve Apostles was planned as the theme - ceilings normally showed only individual figures, not dramatic scenes.
Traces of this project are seen in the 12 large figures that Michelangelo produced: seven prophets and five sibyls (female prophets) found in classical myths.
The inclusion of female figures was very unusual though not totally unprecedented.
Michelangelo placed these figures around the edges of the ceiling and filled the central spine of the long curved surface with nine scenes from Genesis: three depicting the Creation of the World, three the stories of Adam and Eve, and three the stories of Noah.
These are naturally followed, below the prophets and sibyls, by small figures of the 40 generations of Christ’s ancestors, starting with Abraham.
The vast project was completed in less than four years; there was an interruption perhaps of a year in 1510–11 when no payment was made.
<Caption> Pietà, marble sculpture by Michelangelo, 1499; in St. Peter’s Basilica, Rome.
SCALA/Art Resource, New York
Twentieth-century investigations of the technical processes used show that Michelangelo worked more and more rapidly, reducing and finally eliminating such preparatory helps as complete drawings and incisions on the plaster surface.
The same growing boldness appears in the free, complex movements of the figures and in their expressiveness.
While remaining always imposing and monumental, they are more and more imbued with suggestions of stress and grief.
This may be perceived in a figure such as the prophet Ezekiel halfway along.
This figure combines colossal strength and weight with movement and facial expression that suggest determination to reach a goal that is uncertain of success.
Such an image of the inadequacy of even great power is a presentation of heroic and tragic humanity and is central to what Michelangelo means to posterity.
Nearby the scene of the creation of Eve shows her with God and Adam, compressed within too small a space for their grandeur.
This tension has been interpreted as a token of a movement away from the Renaissance concern with harmony, pointing the way for a younger generation of artists, such as Jacopo da Pontormo, often labeled Mannerists.
<Caption> Panels depicting The Fall of Man and the Expulsion from the Garden of Eden, painted on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel by Michelangelo.
The Bridgeman Art Library/Getty Images
THE RESTORATION OF THE CEILING OF THE SISTINE CHAPEL
In the 1980s and ’90s, the Sistine Chapel underwent a long and elaborate restoration scheme sponsored by a Japanese television corporation and carried out by top Italian and international experts.
The cleaning removed centuries of grime, dust, and candle smoke from the frescoes and revealed unexpectedly brilliant colours that partially contradict the celebrated sculptural qualities of Michelangelo’s masterpiece.
A fierce controversy - involving scores of restorers, art historians, and experts in related fields - surrounded the project from its very beginning.
The debate centred on one major issue: Had Michelangelo, in the manner of fresco painters of the day, modified his finished fresco with secco (dry) paint after the plaster had dried? (
Fresco painters customarily did this as a means of correcting mistakes, refining their works, and applying pigments that could not tolerate contact with water.)
And if so, had the restorers’ removal of every layer down to the frescoed plaster falsified the artist’s intentions?
In this case, the shadowing, corrections, and glues removed by restorers appear to have been the result of previous restoration campaigns, although the issue is still debated.
THE LAST PAINTINGS
In his late years Michelangelo was less involved with sculpture and, along with painting and poetry, more with architecture, an area in which he did not have to do physical labour.
His last paintings were the frescoes of the Pauline Chapel in the Vatican, which still is basically inaccessible to the public.
Unlike his other frescoes, they are in the position normal for narrative painting, on a wall and not exceptionally high up.
They consistently treat spatial depth and narrative drama in a way that brings them closer to other paintings of the age than to the artist’s previous paintings.
Among the artists Michelangelo came to know and admire was Titian, who visited Rome during the period of this project (1542–50), and the frescoes seem to betray his influence in colour.
What was believed to be a self-portrait was discovered in one of these paintings, The Crucifixion of Saint Peter, during a restoration of the Pauline Chapel begun in 2004.
Experts agreed that one individual in the crowd - a horseman wearing a blue turban - bore a striking resemblance to the artist.
GIORGIONE (b. c. 1477/78, Castelfranco Veneto, Republic of Venice - d.
before Nov. 7, 1510, Venice)
Nothing is really known about Giorgione’s personal life except the legends reported by the biographer and Mannerist artist Giorgio Vasari in the two editions (1550 and 1568) of his Lives.
Giorgione’s name is given in two surviving documents of 1507 and 1508 as Zorzi da Castelfranco (in Venetian dialect); i.e., Giorgio of Castelfranco.
The form Giorgione (or Zorzon), which is customarily used today, first appears in the 1528 inventory of the Grimani Collection.
His name means “tall George,” or “big George,” implying that he was a large man.
Tradition holds that he was handsome and amorous.
Correspondence dated Oct. 25, 1510, between the celebrated Renaissance patron of the arts Isabella d’Este of Mantua and her agent Taddeo Albano at Venice mentions Giorgione’s death as having occurred recently, probably caused by the plague that was raging in Venice at that time.
Vasari’s biography is the earliest.
It emphasizes the artist’s humble origin, his elevated mind, and his personal charm, but this characterization undoubtedly was a product of Vasari’s imagination, based upon the poetic quality of Giorgione’s paintings.
That the young painter went to Venice to study about 1490 under Giovanni Bellini, the greatest Venetian master of the day, is undeniable.
The technique, colour, and mood of Giorgione’s pictures are clearly related to Bellini’s late style.
Giorgione’s principal public commission was the execution of frescoes on the exterior of the Fondaco dei Tedeschi (the German Exchange), where he painted the figures on the facade over the canal.
The frescoes over the street were carried out by the young Titian, perhaps under Giorgione’s direction.
These works, documented in 1508, are lost, except for fragments that contain faint outlines of figures.
Aside from the works mentioned in specific documents, the notes on the art collections of Venice (Notizie d’opere del disegno), written between 1520 and 1543 by the Venetian patrician Marcantonio Michiel, contain references to pictures by Giorgione.
This information occurs so shortly after the master’s death that it is considered generally reliable.
Of the 12 paintings and 1 drawing listed, 5 works have survived: The Tempest, The Three Philosophers, Sleeping Venus, Boy with an Arrow, and Shepherd with a Flute.
The Tempest is a milestone in Renaissance landscape painting, with its dramatization of a storm about to break.
Here is the kind of poetic interpretation of nature that the Renaissance writers Pietro Bembo and Jacopo Sannazzaro evoked.
This feeling for nature is probably also intimately related to, though not directly derived from, the philosophical “naturalism” of the contemporary Venetian and Paduan humanists grouped around the important Renaissance philosopher Pietro Pomponazzi.
The meaning of the two people seated in the foreground of The Tempest has been the subject of numerous interpretations, none of them definitive.
Michiel called them a soldier and a Gypsy.
Some literary source of a romantic, Arcadian nature is generally assumed, since no Renaissance artist would include two mysterious figures devoid of meaning.
The same kind of literary theme is evoked in the Pastoral Concert (c. 1510), the attribution of which is much debated.
The Sleeping Venus (c. 1510) was left unfinished at Giorgione’s death.
Michiel stated that the task of adding the landscape background fell to Titian.
The picture itself validates this statement, for the landscape, with buildings in the right distance, is repeated in other works by Titian.
Giorgione’s Sleeping Venus inaugurates a long series of paintings of the goddess of love in Venetian art, particularly those of Titian.
None, however, achieved so fully the expression of remoteness and unself-conscious beauty as this majestic and ideally conceived figure.
Judith (c. 1505), though undocumented, evokes the same concept of universal beauty; she is more goddess than avenger of the Jewish people.
<Caption> The Tempest, oil on canvas by Giorgione, c. 1505; in the Galleria dell’Accademia, Venice.
SCALA/Art Resource, New York.
<Caption> Sleeping Venus, oil on canvas by Giorgione, c. 1510, landscape background by Titian; in the Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister, Dresden, Ger.
Sachsische Landesbibliothek/Abteilung Deutsche Fotothek; photograph, B. Walther
Few religious paintings are mentioned in the early documentary sources.
The panels representing the Trial of Moses and the Judgment of Solomon are generally agreed to number among the artist’s first works (c. 1495–1500).
Although the figures look slightly archaic, the beauty of the landscape setting, with its soft melting distances, unmistakably reveals the hand of the painter of The Tempest.
Most celebrated of his religious pictures is the Castelfranco Altarpiece (c. 1504).
The composition of this painting forms an equilateral triangle in conformance with the search for geometric solutions characteristic of the Renaissance mind.
Thoroughly in the spirit of the master are the landscape and the dreamy mood of the figures, who seem lost in reverie.
The Holy Family (c. 1500) and the Adoration of the Shepherds (1505/1510) are of equally fine quality.
The latter is particularly noteworthy for its exquisite use of colour.
<Caption> Adoration of the Shepherds, oil on panel by Giorgione, 1505/1510; in the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. Courtesy of the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., Samuel H. Kress Collection
The Three Philosophers (c. 1510) is one of the works Michiel saw and specifically identified as being by Giorgione.
He stated, however, that it was completed by the Venetian painter Sebastiano del Piombo after the master’s death.
The composition and colour are so fully Giorgione’s that Sebastiano could only have added a few finishing touches.
In addition, the dreamy melancholy of the three men - who represent youth, maturity, and old age - embodies the spirit of the master.
Though the notion of so-called three ages of man is surely implied, little agreement prevails among critics as to whether the three magi, three philosophers, or a literary source in ancient Roman legend is really intended.
The actual painter of many additional paintings of the period remains in dispute.
In portraiture Giorgione made a most profound and far-reaching impression.
Venetian painters such as Titian, Palma Vecchio, and Lorenzo Lotto so closely imitated him in the early 16th century that it is at times virtually impossible to distinguish between them.
Nevertheless, the portrait of a Youth (c. 1504) is universally considered to be by Giorgione.
The indescribably subtle expression of serenity and the immobile features, added to the chiseled effect of the silhouette and modeling, combine to make the Youth an unforgettable expression of Renaissance man.
The same sort of exquisite refinement and sensibility characterizes the disputed portrait supposedly of the poet Antonio Broccardo (c. 1506).
Accepted by all critics is the portrait of the so-called Laura, on the back of which is an inscription giving the date as June 1, 1506, and Zorzi of Castelfranco as the painter.
Giorgione’s Self-Portrait as David (c. 1510), recorded in an engraving of 1650 by the well-known German engraver Wenzel Hollar, can safely be considered a much-damaged original that has been drastically cut down in size.
The artist gave his own portrait more dramatic force by the frown upon his face and by turning the body inward at an angle to the parapet.
Despite considerable recent research, the short-lived master from Castelfranco still remains one of the most enigmatic of Renaissance painters.
Yet the quality and charm of his paintings have made him as highly esteemed today as he was in his own time - a Venetian master of poetic mood created through idealized form, colour, and light.
RAPHAEL (b. April 6, 1483, Urbino, duchy of Urbino - d.
April 6, 1520, Rome, Papal States)
Raffaello Sanzio, who became known as Raphael, was given his first instruction in painting by his father, who was a painter and man of culture.
The artist’s mother died in 1491 and his father in 1494, when Raphael was 11.
Raphael’s hometown, Urbino, had become a centre of culture during the rule of Duke Federico da Montefeltro, who encouraged the arts and attracted the visits of men of outstanding talent, including Donato Bramante, Piero della Francesca, and Leon Battista Alberti, to his court.
Although Raphael would be influenced by major artists in Florence and Rome, Urbino constituted the basis for all his subsequent learning.
Furthermore, the cultural vitality of the city probably stimulated the exceptional precociousness of the young artist, who, even at the beginning of the 16th century, when he was scarcely 17 years old, already displayed an extraordinary talent.
APPRENTICESHIP AT PERUGIA
The date of Raphael’s arrival in Perugia is not known, but several scholars place it in 1495.
The first record of Raphael’s activity as a painter is found there in a document of Dec. 10, 1500, declaring that the young painter, by then called a “master,” was commissioned to help paint an altarpiece to be completed by Sept. 13, 1502.
It is clear from this that Raphael had already given proof of his mastery, so much so that between 1501 and 1503 he received a rather important commission - to paint the Coronation of the Virgin for the Oddi Chapel in the church of San Francesco, Perugia.
The great Umbrian master Pietro Perugino was executing the frescoes in the Collegio del Cambio at Perugia between 1498 and 1500, enabling Raphael, as a member of his workshop, to acquire extensive professional knowledge.
In addition to this practical instruction, Perugino’s calmly exquisite style also influenced Raphael.
The Giving of the Keys to St. Peter, painted in 1481–82 by Perugino for the Sistine Chapel of the Vatican Palace in Rome, inspired Raphael’s first major work, The Marriage of the Virgin (1504).
Perugino’s influence is seen in the emphasis on perspectives, in the graded relationships between the figures and the architecture, and in the lyrical sweetness of the figures.
Nevertheless, even in this early painting, it is clear that Raphael’s sensibility was different from his teacher’s.
The disposition of the figures is less rigidly related to the architecture, and the disposition of each figure in relation to the others is more informal and animated.
The sweetness of the figures and the gentle relation between them surpasses anything in Perugino’s work.
Three small paintings done by Raphael shortly after The Marriage of the Virgin - Vision of a Knight, Three Graces, and St. Michael - are masterful examples of narrative painting, showing, as well as youthful freshness, a maturing ability to control the elements of his own style.
Although he had learned much from Perugino, Raphael by late 1504 needed other models to work from; it is clear that his desire for knowledge was driving him to look beyond Perugia.
MOVE TO FLORENCE
By the autumn of 1504 Raphael had certainly arrived in Florence, drawn there by accounts of the work that Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo were doing there.
It is not known if this was his first visit to Florence, but, as his works attest, it was about 1504 that he first came into substantial contact with this artistic civilization.
<Caption> Madonna del Prato, oil on wood panel by Raphael, 1505; in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna.
Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna
Many of the works that Raphael executed in the years between 1505 and 1507, most notably a great series of Madonnas including The Madonna of the Goldfinch (c. 1505), the Madonna del Prato (c. 1505), the Esterházy Madonna (c. 1505–07), and La Belle Jardinière (c. 1507), are marked by the influence of Leonardo, who since 1480 had been making great innovations in painting.
Raphael was particularly influenced by Leonardo’s Madonna and Child with St. Anne pictures, which are marked by an intimacy and simplicity of setting uncommon in 15th-century art.
Raphael learned the Florentine method of building up his composition in depth with pyramidal figure masses; the figures are grouped as a single unit, but each retains its own individuality and shape.
A new unity of composition and suppression of inessentials distinguishes the works he painted in Florence.
Raphael also owed much to Leonardo’s lighting techniques; he made moderate use of Leonardo’s chiaroscuro (i.e., strong contrast between light and dark), and he was especially influenced by his sfumato.
Raphael went beyond Leonardo, however, in creating new figure types whose round, gentle faces reveal uncomplicated and typically human sentiments but raised to a sublime perfection and serenity.
In 1507 Raphael was commissioned to paint the Deposition of Christ.
In this work, it is obvious that Raphael set himself deliberately to learn from Michelangelo the expressive possibilities of human anatomy.
But Raphael differed from Leonardo and Michelangelo, who were both painters of dark intensity and excitement, in that he wished to develop a calmer and more extroverted style that would serve as a popular, universally accessible form of visual communication.
LAST YEARS IN ROME
Raphael was called to Rome toward the end of 1508 by Pope Julius II at the suggestion of the architect Donato Bramante.
At this time Raphael was little known in Rome, but the young man soon made a deep impression on the volatile Julius and the papal court, and his authority as a master grew day by day.
Handsome and charming in addition to possessing prodigious artistic talents, Raphael eventually became so popular that he was called “the prince of painters.”
He spent the last 12 years of his short life in Rome.
They were years of feverish activity and successive masterpieces.
His first task in the city was to paint a cycle of frescoes in a suite of medium-sized rooms in the Vatican papal apartments in which Julius himself lived and worked.
These rooms are known simply as the Stanze.
The Stanza della Segnatura (1508–11) and Stanza d’Eliodoro (1512–14) were decorated practically entirely by Raphael himself.
The frescoes in the Stanza dell’Incendio (1514–17), though designed by Raphael, were largely executed by his numerous assistants and pupils.
The decoration of the Stanza della Segnatura was perhaps Raphael’s greatest work.
The four main walls in the Stanza della Segnatura are occupied by the frescoes Disputa and the School of Athens on the larger walls and the Parnassus and Cardinal Virtues on the smaller walls.
The two most important of these frescoes are the Disputa and the School of Athens.
The Disputa, showing a celestial vision of God and his prophets and apostles above a gathering of representatives, past and present, of the Roman Catholic church, equates through its iconography the triumph of the church and the triumph of truth.
The School of Athens is a complex allegory of secular knowledge, or philosophy, showing Plato and Aristotle surrounded by philosophers, past and present, in a splendid architectural setting.
It illustrates the historical continuity of Platonic thought.
The School of Athens is perhaps the most famous of all Raphael’s frescoes, and it is one of the culminating artworks of the High Renaissance.
Here Raphael fills an ordered and stable space with figures in a rich variety of poses and gestures, which he controls in order to make one group of figures lead to the next in an interweaving and interlocking pattern, bringing the eye to the central figures of Plato and Aristotle at the converging point of the perspectival space.
The space in which the philosophers congregate is defined by the pilasters and barrel vaults of a great basilica that is based on Bramante’s design for the new St. Peter’s in Rome.
The general effect of the fresco is one of majestic calm, clarity, and equilibrium.
<Caption> Plato and Aristotle surrounded by philosophers, detail from School of Athens, fresco by Raphael, 1508–11; in the Stanza della Segnatura in the Vatican.
Erich Lessing/Art Resource, New York
About the same time, probably in 1511, Raphael painted a more secular subject, the Triumph of Galatea in the Villa Farnesina in Rome.
Meanwhile, Raphael’s decoration of the papal apartments continued after the death of Julius in 1513 and into the succeeding pontificate of Leo X until 1517.
In contrast to the generalized allegories in the Stanza della Segnatura, the decorations in the second room, the Stanza d’Eliodoro, portray specific miraculous events in the history of the Christian church.
The four principal subjects are The Expulsion of Heliodorus from the Temple, Mass at Bolsena, The Liberation of St. Peter, and Leo I Halting Attila.
These frescoes are deeper and richer in colour than are those in the earlier room, and they display a new boldness on Raphael’s part in both their dramatic subjects and their unusual effects of light.
The Liberation of St. Peter, for example, is a night scene and contains three separate lighting effects - moonlight, the torch carried by a soldier, and the supernatural light emanating from an angel.
Raphael delegated his assistants to decorate the third room, the Stanze dell’Incendio, with the exception of one fresco, the Fire in the Borgo, in which his pursuit of more dramatic pictorial incidents and his continuing study of the male nude are plainly apparent.
The Madonnas that Raphael painted in Rome show him turning away from the serenity and gentleness of his earlier works in order to emphasize qualities of energetic movement and grandeur.
His Alba Madonna (1508) epitomizes the serene sweetness of the Florentine Madonnas but shows a new maturity of emotional expression and supreme technical sophistication in the poses of the figures.
It was followed by the Madonna di Foligno (1510) and the Sistine Madonna (1513), which show both the richness of colour and new boldness in compositional invention typical of Raphael’s Roman period.
Some of his other late Madonnas, such as the Madonna of Francis I, are remarkable for their polished elegance.
Besides his other accomplishments, Raphael became the most important portraitist in Rome during the first two decades of the 16th century.
He introduced new types of presentation and new psychological situations for his sitters, as seen in the portrait of Leo X with Two Cardinals (1517–19).
Raphael’s finest work in the genre is perhaps the Portrait of Baldassare Castiglione (1516), a brilliant and arresting character study.
Leo X commissioned Raphael to design 10 large tapestries to hang on the walls of the Sistine Chapel.
Seven of the 10 cartoons (full-size preparatory drawings) were completed by 1516, and the tapestries woven after them were hung in place in the chapel by 1519.
The cartoons represent Christ’s Charge to Peter, The Miraculous Draught of Fishes, The Death of Ananias, The Healing of the Lame Man, The Blinding of Elymas, The Sacrifice at Lystra, and St. Paul Preaching at Athens.
In these pictures Raphael created prototypes that would influence the European tradition of narrative history painting for centuries to come.
The cartoons display Raphael’s keen sense of drama, his use of gestures and facial expressions to portray emotion, and his incorporation of credible physical settings from both the natural world and that of ancient Roman architecture.
Raphael was also a keen student of archaeology and of ancient Greco-Roman sculpture, echoes of which are apparent in his paintings of the human figure during the Roman period.
In 1515 Leo X put him in charge of the supervision of the preservation of marbles bearing valuable Latin inscriptions; two years later he was appointed commissioner of antiquities for the city, and he drew up an archaeological map of Rome.
Raphael had by this time been put in charge of virtually all of the papacy’s various artistic projects in Rome, involving architecture, paintings and decoration, and the preservation of antiquities.
Raphael’s last masterpiece is the Transfiguration (commissioned by Cardinal Giulio de’ Medici in 1517), an enormous altarpiece that was unfinished at his death and completed by his assistant Giulio Romano.
The Transfiguration is a complex work that combines extreme formal polish and elegance of execution with an atmosphere of tension and violence communicated by the agitated gestures of closely crowded groups of figures.
It shows a new sensibility that is like the prevision of a new world, turbulent and dynamic.
In its feeling and composition it inaugurated the Mannerist movement and tends toward an expression that may even be called Baroque.
Raphael died on his 37th birthday.
His funeral mass was celebrated at the Vatican, his Transfiguration placed at the head of the bier, and his body was buried in the Pantheon in Rome.
ANDREA DEL SARTO (b. July 16, 1486, Florence - d.
before Sept. 29, 1530, Florence)
The name by which del Sarto is known is a result of his father’s occupation.
In Italian, sarto means “tailor.”
Little of real interest is known about del Sarto’s largely uneventful life.
He was notably short in stature and known to his friends as Andreino.
With two brief exceptions, his working life was spent in Florence.
He was a pupil of Piero di Cosimo and was greatly influenced by Raphael, Leonardo da Vinci, and Fra Bartolommeo.
Del Sarto’s art, rooted in traditional Quattrocento (15th-century) painting, combined Leonardo’s sfumato with Raphael’s compositional harmony in a style that was typical of the Cinquecento (16th century).
He began to produce independent work about 1506.
Almost immediately he began a long association with the church and convent of SS.
Annunziata (for which he executed frescoes in 1509–14 and 1525), and he moved to a workshop near it in or about 1511.
There, for five or six years, he shared the experiences and sometimes commissions of a major sculptor, Jacopo Sansovino, which led him to an increasingly and, in the end, exceptionally solidly structured style.
These were the years in which Il Rosso and Pontormo were his pupils, and it may fairly be said that about 1513–14 the leadership in Florentine painting passed from the workshop of Fra Bartolommeo to that of del Sarto.
In 1517 or 1518 del Sarto married Lucrezia del Fede, a widow whom he had, according to her testimony, used as a model for several years.
She brought him property and a useful dowry.
In 1518 he was summoned by the king of France, Francis I, to Fontainebleau, where he was preceded by a reputation based upon pictures made for export.
It is unlikely that he found the life of a court artist congenial, and he remained for a year or less without beginning any major commission.
Soon after his return, his connections with the Medici family (powerful since their return to Florence from exile in 1512) led to the most significant contract of his career - for part of the decoration of the Villa Medici at Poggio a Caiano, near Florence.
The patron was in fact the pope, Leo X, whom del Sarto almost certainly visited in Rome in 1519–20.
The project - which was the only one that ever offered Florentine artists the scope that Raphael had had in the Vatican Palace - collapsed when the pope died in December 1521.
In 1520 del Sarto began to build a substantial house in Florence.
By 1523 he had a manservant as well as apprentices.
Throughout his life he was content to work, when it suited him, for nominal fees, for no remuneration at all, or for only part of a fee offered to him, probably because he was in comfortable circumstances.
A plague in 1523–24 drove del Sarto and his wife to seek security in the Mugello, a valley north of Florence, but the interruption was brief.
After the expulsion of the Medici, once again, in 1527, he worked for the republican government of Florence.
His Sacrifice of Isaac, intended as a political present to Francis I, was painted in this period.
After the siege of Florence by imperial and papal forces, he succumbed to a new wave of plague and died in his house.
Sources differ on the exact date of del Sarto’s death, but documents show that he was buried in SS.
Annunziata on Sept. 29, 1530.
Del Sarto’s most striking monument is the grisaille series of frescoes on the life of St. John the Baptist in the Chiostro dello Scalzo in Florence. (
Grisaille describes a technique using a single colour - especially gray - modeled to produce a three-dimensional effect.)
Begun about 1511, the work was not completed until 1526, and almost all of it was painted by his own hand, so that it reads like an artistic autobiography covering the greater part of his career.
His portraits of his wife, Lucrezia (c. 1513–14 and c. 1522), can be supplemented by many others disguised as Madonnas (e.g., the celebrated Madonna of the Harpies), just as his thus-identified self-portraits (both c. 1528) can possibly be extended by several others, more or less hidden in his paintings from 1511 onward.
<Caption> Madonna of the Harpies, tempera on wood by Andrea del Sarto, 1517; in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence.
SCALA/Art Resource, New York
Del Sarto’s style is marked throughout his career by an interest in effects of colour and atmosphere and by sophisticated informality and natural expression of emotion.
In his early works such as the Marriage of St. Catherine, the search for the expression of animation and emotion led to an ecstatic and nonidealistic style that proved immensely attractive to a younger generation of painters.
Restraint increasing with maturity did not inhibit the achievement of such passionate later works as the Pietà (c. 1520), but the mood is always intimate and never rhetorical.
In the 1520s his style, as a result of the influence of Michelangelo or of artistic events in Rome, became perceptibly more ideal and more polished and approximates what may properly be called a grand manner in the last of the Scalzo frescoes, the Birth of the Baptist (1526).
From first to last, del Sarto’s integrity as a craftsman, his sheer professionalism, is impressively consistent.
Among his pupils and followers were most of the significant Florentine painters of the first half of the 16th century - Rosso Fiorentino, Pontormo, Francesco Salviati, and Giorgio Vasari, for example - and it is largely through his example that the tradition of Florentine art was transmitted through to the end of the Renaissance.
TITIAN (b. 1488/90, Pieve di Cadore, Republic of Venice - d.
Aug. 27, 1576, Venice)
Titian (Tiziano Vecellio, or Vecelli) was born in the small alpine village of Pieve di Cadore, straight north of Venice.
At age nine he set out for Venice with his brother, Francesco, to live there with an uncle and to become an apprentice to a master mosaicist.
The boy soon passed to the workshop of the Bellini, where his true teacher became Giovanni Bellini, the greatest Venetian painter of the day.
Titian’s early works are richly evident of his schooling and also of his association as a young man with Giorgione of Castelfranco.
Their collaboration in 1508 on the frescoes of the Fondaco dei Tedeschi (the German Exchange) is the point of departure for Titian’s career, and it explains why it is difficult to distinguish between the two artists in the early years of the 16th century.
It is certain that Titian’s first independent commission was for the frescoes of three miracles of St. Anthony of Padua.
The finest in composition is the Miracle of the Speaking Infant; another, the Miracle of the Irascible Son, has a beautiful landscape background that demonstrates how similar in topography and mood were Titian’s and Giorgione’s works at this time.
In fact, after Giorgione’s death in 1510, Titian assumed the task of adding the landscape background to Giorgione’s unfinished Sleeping Venus, a fact recorded by a contemporary writer, Marcantonio Michiel.
Still Giorgionesque is the somewhat more lush setting of Titian’s Baptism of Christ (c. 1515), in which the donor, Giovanni Ram, appears at the lower right.
The authorship of individual portraits is the most difficult of all to establish, but the Gentleman in Blue (so-called Ariosto) is certainly Titian’s because it is signed with the initials T.V. The volume and the interest in texture in the quilted sleeve seem to identify Titian’s own style.
On the other hand, The Concert has been one of the most debated portraits, because since the 17th century it was thought to be most typical of Giorgione.
The pronounced psychological content as well as the notable clarity of modelling in the central figure led 20th-century critics to favour Titian.
Technique and the clear intelligence of the young Venetian aristocrat in the Young Man with Cap and Gloves has led modern critics to attribute this and similar portraits to Titian.
The earliest compositions on mythological or allegorical themes show the young artist still under the spell of Giorgione in his creation of a poetic Arcadian world where nothing commonplace or sordid exists.
The inspiration lies in the idyllic world of the love lyrics of the 16th-century Italian poets Jacopo Sannazzaro and Pietro Bembo.
The Three Ages of Man, where the erotic relationship of the young couple is discreetly muted and a mood of tenderness and sadness prevails, is one of the most exquisite of these.
The contemporary Sacred and Profane Love is likewise set in a landscape of extraordinary beauty, but here the allegory is less easily understood.
MATURE LIFE AND WORKS
Sometime in the early 1520s Titian brought to his house in Venice a young woman from Cadore whose name was Cecilia.
Two sons were born in 1524 and 1525, first Pomponio, who became a priest, and second Orazio, later a painter and Titian’s chief assistant.
During Cecilia’s grave illness in 1525, Titian married her.
She recovered and later gave birth to two daughters, Lavinia (born 1529/30) and another who died in infancy.
On Cecilia’s death in 1530, the artist was disconsolate and he never remarried.
Titian’s fame had spread abroad, and Alfonso I d’Este sought him as one of the chief masters in a cycle of mythological compositions for his newly rebuilt rooms called the Alabaster Chambers in the castle at Ferrara.
Among the paintings completed for this project are the Worship of Venus, The Bacchanal of the Andrians, and the spectacular Bacchus and Ariadne.
The gaiety of mood, the spirit of pagan abandon, and the exquisite sense of humour in the latter, an interpretation of an idyllic world of antiquity, make it one of the miracles of Renaissance art.
Warmth and richness of colour help to balance the intentionally asymmetrical grouping of the figures, placed in richly verdant landscape that is also an integral part of the design.
At this time Titian partially repainted the background of Giovanni Bellini’s Feast of the Gods, so that the picture would better fit the series in the same room at Ferrara.
The standard for the reclining nude female obliquely placed in the picture space was established by Giorgione in the Sleeping Venus.
In Titian’s Venus of Urbino the ideal rendering of the body and the position remain virtually unchanged, except that the goddess is awake and reclines upon a couch within the spacious room of a palace.
For sheer beauty of form these two works were never surpassed.
<Caption> The Bacchanal of the Andrians, oil on canvas by Titian, c. 1523–26; in the Prado, Madrid.
Courtesy of Archivo Mas, Barcelona
Among the religious paintings Titian produced between 1516 and 1538 is one of his most revolutionary masterpieces, the Assumption (1516–18).
When the painting was unveiled it was quickly recognized as the work of a genius.
The posture of the Madonna in the Assumption and the composition of Titian’s Madonna and Child with SS.
Francis and Alvise and Alvise Gozzi as Donor reveal the influence of Titian’s contemporary Raphael; and the pose of St. Sebastian in the Resurrection Altarpiece, the influence of Michelangelo.
These influences, however, are of secondary importance since the landscapes, the physical types, and the colour are completely original.
In the Pesaro Madonna (1519–26) Titian created a new type of composition, in which the Madonna and Saints with the male members of the Pesaro family are placed within a monumental columnar portico of a church.
The picture is flooded with sunlight and shadows.
This work established a formula that was widely followed by later Venetian Renaissance painters and served as an inspiration for some Baroque masters as well.
Such a quantity of masterpieces by Titian followed that only a few can be mentioned.
The poetic charm of the artist’s pictures with landscape continues in the Madonna and Child with St. Catherine and a Rabbit and the Madonna and Child with SS.
John the Baptist and Catherine of Alexandria (c. 1530).
The Entombment is his first tragic masterpiece, where in a twilight setting the irrevocable finality of death and the despair of Christ’s followers are memorably evoked.
The stately Presentation of the Virgin in the Temple, a very large canvas, reflects the splendour of Venetian Renaissance society in the great architectural setting.
One of Titian’s great triumphs came when he answered the call to Bologna in 1530 at the time of Charles V’s coronation as Holy Roman emperor.
In 1531, in keeping with his social state, he moved to a Venetian palace known as the Casa Grande.
Titian returned to Bologna to portray Charles V again on the occasion of the second meeting of Charles V and Pope Clement VII in the winter of 1532–33.
The portrait of Charles V in Armour (1530) and another painted in January 1533 are lost, while only a lesser work, Charles V with Hound (1532–33), a copy of a portrait by Jakob Seisenegger, survives.
Charles was so pleased with Titian’s work that in May 1533 he bestowed upon the artist the most extraordinary honour of knighthood.
Thereafter, the Austrian-Spanish Habsburgs remained Titian’s most important patrons.
Titian’s other portraits in the 1520s and 1530s provide a gallery of the leading aristocrats of Italy.
A splendid example is Alfonso d’Avalos, Marques del Vasto (1533), brilliantly rendered in gleaming armour ornamented with gold.
He is accompanied by a small page whose head reaches his waist.
The introduction of a secondary figure to give scale is a device frequently adopted by Titian.
These works are essentially idealized state portraits, although the heads are very convincingly rendered.
LATE LIFE AND WORKS
Titian continued to create a large number of masterpieces in portraiture throughout the rest of his life.
Pope Paul III and his grandson, Cardinal Alessandro Farnese, began to compete with Emperor Charles V for Titian’s services.
At the pope’s request, the painter prepared the celebrated official portrait, Pope Paul III Without Cap (1543).
Although a state symbol of the pontiff, the characterization of the crafty statesman, bent with age, comes through.
Titian’s next major association with the Farnese came in 1545–46, when he made his only visit to Rome.
Of portraits of the Farnese family carried out at this time, few remain.
The most celebrated of all is Paul III and His Grandsons Ottavio and Cardinal Alessandro Farnese (1546).
A painting of a family group, it is most searching in psychological revelation.
The feeble pope, then aged 78, appears to turn suddenly in his chair toward Ottavio Farnese, his 22-year-old grandson.
Ottavio’s overly obsequious bow and his shrewd Machiavellian profile demonstrate Titian’s sheer genius in understanding and recording character.
That portrait and another, The Vendramin Family, are probably Titian’s greatest.
In The Vendramin Family the two heads of the clan kneel in adoration of a reliquary of the Holy Cross, accompanied by seven sons ranging in age from about 8 to 20.
This portrait group is a tour de force in technical brilliance, richly beautiful in colour, and sensitive in its portrayal of a wide range of emotions.
On his departure from Rome, in 1546, Titian’s association with the Farnese ended.
He received no payment for his pictures, and his hopes for recompense in the form of a benefice for his son Pomponio were never realized.
Titian threw in his lot with the Habsburgs.
When in January 1548 he traveled to Augsburg, he created one of his most memorable works, the equestrian Emperor Charles V at Mühlberg, designed to commemorate the emperor’s victory over the Protestants the year before.
It is the great state portrait par excellence, intended to show the emperor as a Christian knight, as he wished posterity to remember him.
He achieved another tour de force in his portrait of Prince Philip (later Philip II).
Like some of Titian’s earlier religious paintings, Christ Before Pilate is a work in which Titian managed a large crowd in a processional manner leading to the focal point, the figure of Christ at the left.
The composition marks a new phase in Titian’s development.
The compact massing of figures, the oblique position of the steps and the wall at the left, and the general effect of excitement are indicative of the mid-16th-century style known as Mannerism, though in Titian’s consummate style.
<Caption> Adam and Eve, oil on panel by Titian, 1550; in the Prado, Madrid.
SCALA/Art Resource, New York
Titian returned to Venice in 1551 and remained there for the rest of his life except for summer visits to his native city.
In his last 25 years his productivity was undiminished in quantity and in creative ideas.
One of the latest and most dramatic of his late portraits was that of Jacopo Strada, in which this brilliant antiquarian, writer, and art collector is shown presenting to the spectator a small statue, a Roman copy of an Aphrodite of Praxiteles.
Here again, the scope and variety of Titian’s invention is astonishing in this new composition, so notable for lively action, psychological perception, and pictorial beauty.
Also memorable is Titian’s Self Portrait, in which he presents himself with great dignity, wearing the golden chain of knighthood.
The intelligent, tired face is fully rendered, while the costume is sketched in lightly with a free brush.
Notable among the late religious paintings is the Trinity (or La Gloria), painted for Charles V’s personal devotion.
The glowing richness of colour predominates in this adoration of the Trinity in which Charles V and his family appear among the elect.
In his late religious pictures Titian veils the human forms in shadowy light and so increases the dominant mood of spirituality.
One sees this effect in the late Entombment, in which muted colour prevails, and in the awesome tragedy of the Crucifixion.
All is miraculous in the Annunciation, in which Gabriel rushes in and an assembly of angels in glory hovers about the Virgin.
Titian’s final word and last testament is the Pietà, intended for his own burial chapel but left unfinished and completed by Palma il Giovane.
The subdued colour befits the all-prevailing sorrow and the immutability of death in this, one of the artist’s most profound achievements.
A group of several important pictures of mythological themes was created by the master in 1554–62 for Charles’s successor, Philip II of Spain, who never bothered to pay Titian for them.
From the letters of the artist to the king, it is clear that he planned the paintings in pairs, but otherwise they do not constitute a comprehensive iconographic program.
The first pair consists of the Danae with Nursemaid and the Venus and Adonis.
The Danae is undoubtedly the most voluptuous in Titian’s entire repertory.
In colour and technique, as well, it is one of Titian’s greatest achievements.
The Perseus and Andromeda was intended to be a companion to Medea and Jason, according to Titian’s letter, but for some reason the second picture was never carried out.
The Rape of Europa is surely one of the most cheerful of Titian’s “poesies,” as he called them.
Titian’s fondness for oblique compositions is most successfully applied here, for it contributes to the sense of movement, and it allows for the extensive seascape and the mountainous shore.
The sheer wizardry of Titian’s technique is nowhere more fully demonstrated than in the misty distances shot through with blues and sunset rose and in the expanse of sea with its iridescent lights.
In The Rape of Europa Titian reached the climax of his powers, and by good fortune the picture has survived in almost perfect condition.
Others of his “poesies” have fared less well.
<Caption> The Rape of Europa, oil on canvas by Titian, 1560–62; in the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston.
Courtesy of the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston
CORREGGIO (b. August 1494, Correggio [now in Emilia-Romagna, Italy] - d.
March 5, 1534, Correggio)
Antonio Allegri was born in Correggio, a small city whose name he took as his own.
He was not, as it is often alleged, a self-taught artist.
His early work refutes the theory, for it shows an educated knowledge of optics, perspective, architecture, sculpture, and anatomy.
His initial instruction probably came from his uncle, Lorenzo Allegri, a painter of moderate ability, at Correggio.
About 1503 he probably studied in Modena and then went to Mantua, arriving before the death in 1506 of the famed early Renaissance painter Andrea Mantegna.
It has traditionally been said that he completed the decoration of Mantegna’s family chapel in the church of Sant’Andrea at Mantua after the artist’s death.
It seems certain that the two round paintings, or tondi, of the Entombment of Christ and Madonna and Saints are by the young Correggio.
It is also fairly certain that early in his career he visited Rome and came under the influence of the Vatican frescoes of Michelangelo and Raphael.
After Correggio left Mantua, he divided his time between Parma and his hometown.
His first documented painting, an altarpiece of the Madonna of St. Francis, was commissioned for San Francesco at Correggio in 1514.
The best-known works of his youth are a group of devotional pictures that became increasingly luscious in colour.
They include the Nativity, Adoration of the Kings, and Christ Taking Leave of His Mother.
Correggio’s mature style emerged with his first commission for Parma, the ceiling of the abbess’s parlour in the convent of San Paolo, which was probably executed about 1518–19.
Although there are echoes in this work of Mantegna’s murals in the Castello at Mantua (1494), it was wholly original in conception.
The abbess Giovanna de Piacenza secured for Correggio another important appointment: to decorate the dome of the church of San Giovanni Evangelista at Parma.
The dome fresco of the Ascension of Christ (1520–23) was followed by the decoration of the apse of the same church, of which only the segment entitled Coronation of the Virgin survives, the remainder having been destroyed in 1587.
This work was still in the High Renaissance tradition and owed much to Michelangelo.
The fresco of the Assumption of the Virgin in the dome of the cathedral of Parma marks the culmination of Correggio’s career as a mural painter.
This fresco anticipates the Baroque style of dramatically illusionistic ceiling painting.
The entire architectural surface is treated as a single pictorial unit of vast proportions, equating the dome of the church with the vault of heaven.
The realistic way the figures in the clouds seem to protrude into the spectators’ space is an audacious and astounding use for the time of foreshortening (method of rendering a specific object or figure in a picture in depth).
The remainder of Correggio’s most famous works, few of whose dates are known with certainty, fall into three groups: the great altarpieces (and a few other large religious compositions); exquisite small works of private devotion; and a handful of mythological subjects of a lyrically sensuous character.
Many of the altarpieces became so well known that they acquired nicknames.
The Adoration of the Shepherds (c. 1530) is called Night (La Notte), and the Madonna of St. Jerome is popularly known as Day (Il Giorno).
The late altarpieces are generally characterized by an intimate and domestic mood sustained between idealized figures.
This intimate and homely poetry also distinguishes the small devotional works, such as The Madonna of the Basket and The Virgin Adoring the Child Jesus, while the Mystic Marriage of St. Catherine is a visual essay in the mid-16th-century aesthetic of ideal feminine beauty.
In these late works Correggio fully exploited the medium of oil painting.
He was intrigued with the sensual beauty of paint texture and achieved his most remarkable effects in a series of mythological works, including the Danae, The Rape of Ganymede, and Jupiter and Io.
The sensuous character of the subject matter is enhanced by the quality of the paint, which seems to have been lightly breathed onto the canvas.
Correggio had many imitators but no direct pupils deserving mention.
His decorative ideas were taken up by the Baroque painters of the 17th century, particularly in the ceiling painting of Giovanni Lanfranco (1582–1647), himself a native of Parma.
Correggio became almost a tutelary deity of the French Rococo style, and his great altarpieces were among the works most abundantly copied by the traveling artists of the 18th century during their years of study in Italy.
PAINTERS OF ITALIAN MANNERISM AND LATE RENAISSANCE
Reaction against the great style of the High Renaissance set in during the early part of the 16th century.
Following are biographies of some of the painters who helped bring the Renaissance era to a close.
PARMIGIANINO (b. Jan. 11, 1503, Parma, duchy of Milan - d.
Aug. 24, 1540, Casalmaggiore, Cremona)
Parmigianino was the byname of Girolamo Francesco Maria Mazzola (Mazzuoli).
There is no doubt that Correggio was the strongest single influence on Parmigianino’s early development, but Parmigianino probably was never his pupil.
The influence is apparent in Parmigianino’s first important work, the Mystic Marriage of St. Catherine (c. 1521).
About 1522–23 he executed two series of frescoes.
One series, in two side chapels of S. Giovanni Evangelista, in Parma, was executed contemporaneously with Correggio’s great murals on the dome and pendentives of that church, and the other, representing the Legend of Diana and Actaeon, was executed on the ceiling of a room in the Rocca Sanvitale at Fontanellato just outside Parma.
The scheme of the latter decoration recalls Correggio’s work in the Camera (convent) di San Paolo in Parma.
<Caption> Parmigianino, self-portrait from a convex mirror, oil on convex panel, 1524; in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna.
Courtesy of the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna
After the summer of 1524, Parmigianino moved to Rome, taking with him three specimens of his work to impress the pope, including the famous self-portrait that he had painted on a convex panel from his reflection in a convex mirror.
His chief painting done in Rome is the large Vision of St. Jerome (1527).
Although this work shows the influence of Michelangelo, it was Raphael’s ideal beauty of form and feature that influenced his entire oeuvre.
While at work on the Vision of St. Jerome in 1527, he was interrupted by soldiers of the imperial army taking part in the sack of Rome, and he left for Bologna.
There he painted one of his masterpieces, the Madonna with St. Margaret and Other Saints.
In 1531 he returned to Parma, where he remained for the rest of his life, the principal works of this last period being the Madonna of the Long Neck (1534) and the frescoes on the vault preceding the apse of Sta.
Maria della Steccata.
The latter were to have been only part of a much larger scheme of decoration in the church, but Parmigianino was extremely dilatory over their execution, and he was eventually imprisoned for breaking his contract, while the frescoes were contracted to Giulio Romano and Michelangelo Anselmi.
<Caption> Madonna of the Long Neck, oil on wood by Parmigianino, c. 1535; in the Uffizi, Florence.
SCALA/Art Resource, New York
Parmigianino was one of the most remarkable portrait painters of the century outside Venice.
Some of his best portraits are in Naples, in the National Museum and Gallery of Capodimonte, including the Gian Galeazzo Sanvitale (1524) and the portrait of a young woman called Antea (c. 1535–37).
The style that he developed was, in its suave attenuations and technical virtuosity, one of the most brilliant and influential manifestations of Mannerism.
It was an extreme development of Raphael’s late manner and opposed the naturalistic basis inherent in High Renaissance art.
Parmigianino’s works are distinguished by ambiguity of spatial composition, by distortion and elongation of the human figure, and by the pursuit of a rhythmical, sensuous beauty beyond the beauty of nature.
This last quality of attenuated elegance is evident not only in Parmigianino’s paintings but also in his numerous and sensitive drawings.
TINTORETTO (b. c. 1518, Venice - d.
May 31, 1594, Venice)
Little is known of the life of Tintoretto (born Jacopo Robusti).
His byname is a reflection of his father’s profession, a dyer of silk (tintore).
In a will of 1539 he called himself an independent professional man - not a surprising description in view of his imposing and forceful personality.
No documents have survived regarding his artistic education.
EARLY LIFE
His biographers, among them Carlo Ridolfi, whose book was published in 1648, speak of an apprenticeship with Titian that was broken off because of the master’s resentment of the pupil’s proud nature and exceptional accomplishment.
On the other hand, a contemporary pointed out that Tintoretto’s style was formed by studying formal elements of the Tuscan school, especially those of Michelangelo, and pictorial elements derived from Titian.
BIOGRAPHER OF RENAISSANCE PAINTERS
The name of Giorgio Vasari (1511–74) is scattered throughout because it was he who first documented the lives and legends of Renaissance artists.
Vasari’s own training as an artist was carried out most decisively in Florence, where he enjoyed the friendship and patronage of the Medici family, trained within the circle of Andrea del Sarto, and became a lifelong admirer of Michelangelo.
But it is not for his paintings - which have been characterized as facile, superficial, and lacking a sense of colour - nor yet for his outstanding Tuscan Mannerist architecture, which includes the Uffizi (now an art gallery) in Florence and the church, monastery, and palace created for the Cavalieri di San Stefano in Pisa, that Vasari is best known.
Vasari’s reputation rests instead on his massive book Le Vite de’ più eccellenti architetti, pittori, et scultori italiani… (1550, 2nd ed.,
1568; Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects, 1850–52, trans.
of the 2nd ed.),
which was dedicated to Cosimo de’ Medici.
In it Vasari offers his own critical history of Western art through several prefaces and a lengthy series of artist biographies.
These discussions present three periods of artistic development: according to Vasari, the excellence of the art of classical antiquity was followed by a decline of quality during the Dark Ages, which was in turn reversed by a renaissance of the arts in Tuscany in the 14th century, initiated by Cimabue and Giotto and culminating in the works of Michelangelo.
A second and much-enlarged edition of Lives, which added the biographies of a number of artists then living, as well as Vasari’s own autobiography, is now much better known than the first edition and has been widely translated.
Vasari’s writing style in the Lives is anecdotal and eminently readable.
When facts were scarce, however, he often supplied information of questionable veracity.
His bias toward Italian (and more specifically Tuscan) art is also undeniable.
Despite these flaws, Vasari’s work in Lives represents the first large-scale example of modern historiography and has proven to be hugely influential.
The canon of Italian Renaissance artists he established endures as the standard to this day.
Moreover, the trajectory of art history he presented has formed the conceptual basis for Renaissance scholarship and continues to influence popular perceptions of the history of Western painting.
Most probably, Tintoretto’s precocious talent prompted his father to place him in the workshop of some undistinguished painter, but one with a solid artisan tradition so that his son might learn the foundations of his craft.
Traces of an absolute style in his youthful works tend to corroborate this hypothesis.
But he soon became aware of the variety of approaches tried by painters working between 1530 and 1540 in Venice and already reacting against the style of Giorgione, who was the first to merge forms and to subordinate local colour to its pervading tone.
The emigration of Roman artists to Venice in 1527 after the sack of Rome by imperial troops, as well as subsequent contacts with painters from Tuscany and Bologna, induced the painters of the Venetian school to express greater concern for the figure, while retaining the signature chromatic nature of the Venetian tradition.
The influence of Michelangelo, the visit of the art historian and biographer Giorgio Vasari to Venice in 1541, and the journeys of Venetian artists to central Italy renewed Venetian painting in depth, giving it means of expression adapted to different types of pictures.
In the renewed idiom, form and colour were blended in a synthesis in which light dominated so as to express a richly fantastic and visionary spirit.
Thus, the early works of Tintoretto were affected by all of these influences.
Critics have identified a group of youthful works by Tintoretto, above all a group of sacre conversazioni (paintings of the Madonna and Child with Saints).
One of these, painted in 1540, represents the Virgin with the Child on her knees, facing away from her, and six saints.
While the style echoes various elements of the Venetian art of Tintoretto’s time, it also shows a definite Michelangelesque influence.
CAREER
Tintoretto’s first phase includes a group of 14 octagonal ceiling paintings with mythological themes (originally painted for a Venetian palace), which exhibit singular refinement in perspective and narrative clarity.
The fresco technique had an important part in the formation of Tintoretto’s idiom, for it suggested to him the quickness of execution that was to become fundamental to his manner of painting.
Unfortunately only some 18th-century prints of his frescoes and a few fragments of the numerous frescoed facades that adorned Venice survive.
Tintoretto’s drawing exercises were made from nature, from statues, and from small wax models posed in various ways and artificially illuminated, as in tiny stage sets.
These methods were suited to the painter’s concern with resolving problems of form and light.
The indefatigable draftsman acquired a narrative fluency that allowed him to trace with a brisk brushstroke and fanciful inspiration the series of biblical stories, the mythological episodes for the poet Pietro Aretino’s house in Venice (1545), and sacred compositions such as Christ and the Adulteress, in which figures set in vast spaces in fanciful perspectives are illuminated in a distinctly Mannerist style.
Tintoretto became the centre of attention of artists and literary men with his S. Marco Freeing the Slave.
A letter from Aretino, full of praise, yet also intended to temper Tintoretto’s youthful exuberance, confirmed the fame of the 30-year-old painter.
Relations between Tintoretto and Aretino did not come to an end at this point, even though one of Aretino’s letters contains hints of dissension.
Although Aretino was no longer to write laudatory letters to Tintoretto, he commissioned him to execute family portraits, and after Aretino’s death, Tintoretto painted his likeness in the huge Crucifixion of the Scuola Grande di S. Rocco (1565).
The painting S. Marco Freeing the Slave is so rich in structural elements of post-Michelangelesque Roman art that it is reasonable to assume that Tintoretto had visited Rome.
He did not, however, interrupt his artistic experiments.
Stories from Genesis, painted for the Scuola della Trinità (1550–53), show a new attention to Titian’s manner of painting as well as a palpable awareness of nature.
The masterpiece of this phase is undoubtedly Susanna and the Elders (1555–56).
The light creates Susanna’s form in crystalline clarity against a background evoked with a fresh poetic sense.
<Caption> Susannah and the Elders, oil on canvas by Tintoretto, 1555-56; in the Prado Museum, Madrid.
© Image Asset Management Ltd./SuperStock
In 1555 Tintoretto, now a famous and sought-after painter, married Faustina Episcopi, who, affectionate and devoted, had eight children with him.
At least three of them - Marietta, Domenico, and Marco - learned their father’s trade and became his associates.
An artist of indefatigable activity and a veritable fury of creativity, Tintoretto spent most of his life in the bosom of his family and in his workshop.
This particular period in Tintoretto’s career - marked by greater vivacity of colour, by a predilection for a variegated perspective, and by a highly decorative quality - coincided with his growing admiration for the art of Paolo Veronese, who had been working in the Doges’ Palace.
The assimilation and transformation of the Veronesian elements in Tintoretto’s work are discernible in his beautiful ceiling paintings of Bible stories.
The use of a colour that absorbs light yielded new possibilities for suggesting spaces no longer structured by the pure play of perspective.
And in those spaces the painter introduced crowds in harmonized order with the rest of the picture, a feature that had until then been missing in Venetian art.
It was at that time that Tintoretto began to participate in the decoration of the church of the Madonna dell’Orto and the private chapel of the Contarini family contained within it.
Tintoretto’s works for the Madonna dell’Orto, which occupied him for approximately a decade, give an idea of the evolution of the idiomatic elements of his art; in St. Peter’s Vision of the Cross and in The Decapitation of St. Paul (c. 1556), the figures stand out dramatically on a space suffused with a vaporous, unreal light.
In the two enormous canvases depicting the Israelites worshipping the golden calf while Moses on Mt. Sinai receives the tables of the law and a Last Judgment, Tintoretto painted two works of the highest rank with a great richness of narrative means.
The high figurative quality of the two paintings implies that Tintoretto made a number of experiments in this decade.
Proof of this is, above all, the dramatic style in which the scenes are executed, a style that firmly impresses their romantic pathos on the beholder.
Tintoretto’s spatial conception has a dynamic character.
As a modern critic has noted, Tintoretto conveys a feeling of an almost precipitate falling forward or of an equally swift rise.
The contrasted movements give the figures a similar instability.
To achieve such effects Tintoretto used formulas that were invariably different: in The Pool of Bethesda in the church of S. Rocco (1559) the evangelical episode is realized in a compressed space through which the foreshortened ceiling seems to weigh upon the milling crowd; in St. George and the Dragon Tintoretto sets the fable in a landscape of considerable depth, intersected by the white walls of the city.
In May 1564 the councillors of the Scuola Grande di S. Rocco determined to have the Sala dell’Albergo decorated with paintings, in place of the movable decorations used during feast days.
S. Rocco (St. Roch) is the protector against plagues; the numerous epidemics of that period had given new impetus to the cult of the saint and caused great riches to flow to the Scuola, which built a splendid centre to assist the poor and the infirm.
When Tintoretto presented the Scuola with his oval painting the Glorification of S. Rocco, the directors commissioned him to decorate the Sala.
The question of who assisted Tintoretto in his dizzying activity is still open; at that time Marietta was only about nine and Domenico four, but it is known that in 1560 Tintoretto’s studio began to be visited by young painters, especially from the Netherlands and Germany.
In 1565 his immense Crucifixion was displayed in the Sala dell’Albergo.
Around Christ, in the centre, many figures revolve in a livid light that, muting the picture’s colours, invests it with dramatic power.
The decoration of the chamber was completed in 1567; its scenes of Christ’s Passion are remarkable for their thematic innovations.
Vasari, who visited Venice in 1566 to bring his Lives of the Most Eminent Italian Architects, Painters, & Sculptors up to date, had an opportunity to follow Tintoretto’s work in progress.
Undoubtedly he had the painter’s most recent works in mind when he wrote that Tintoretto was “the most extraordinary brain that the art of painting has produced.”
In 1576, with renewed zeal, Tintoretto resumed the decoration of the Scuola Grande di S. Rocco.
He had finished the huge central panel of the upper hall with The Erection of the Brazen Serpent in time for the feast of the saint on August 16.
In 1581 all the ceiling paintings (10 ovals and 8 rhomboid chiaroscuro panels) and 10 teleri (large narrative paintings on canvas) on the walls were completed.
It seems almost impossible that in the same year the painter should have executed the four mythological allegories for the Doges’ Palace, of which the most famous is that of Ariadne, Bacchus, and Venus.
All four are works of great elegance.
But the real Tintoretto is certainly to be found in S. Rocco, where he, like the medieval mosaicists, offers an illustrated Bible to the crowds of the poor who frequented the beneficent institution.
<Caption> Self-portrait, oil on canvas by Tintoretto, 1588; in the Louvre, Paris.
© SuperStock
By 1577 Marietta and Domenico, already officers of the painters’ guild, could help their father, together with other future artists of the close of the 16th and the beginning of the 17th century.
Certainly the presence of collaborators is obvious in two cycles: the eight scenes of the Gonzaga Cycle, with vivid scenes of battles, painted between 1579 and 1580, and the many paintings for the halls of the Scrutinio and of the Maggior Consiglio in the Doges’ Palace, which the republic wanted to adorn with new canvases after the fire of 1577.
It was certainly his wish to finish his immense work in the decoration of S. Rocco that induced the aging painter to leave the canvases of the Doges’ Palace largely to his workshop.
In the canvases executed between 1583 and 1587 for the lower hall of the Scuola Grande di S. Rocco, depicting episodes of the life of Mary and Christ, Tintoretto follows a new direction: light in its most lyrical meaning dominates the paintings, dissolving the colour in a flash of diaphanous brushstrokes.
Space is multiplied in unlimited successions of perspectives; the scenery at times prevails over the human figure, as in the two great works in the ground floor hall, with the St. Mary of Egypt and the St. Mary Magdalene immersed in an incandescent hazy atmosphere in which things are animated with a life of their own: an invitation to the contemplative life of the 70-year-old painter, more than ever leaning toward the view of humanity and its destiny offered by the Christian faith.
A marvelous model of the Paradise for the Doges’ Palace and The Last Supper of S. Giorgio Maggiore, with the incorporeal apparitions of angelic creatures, finished a few months before his death, are proof of Tintoretto’s deep spiritual bent.
He died in 1594 and was buried in the church of Madonna dell’Orto next to his favourite child, Marietta.
PAOLO VERONESE (b. 1528, Verona, Republic of Venice - d.
April 9, 1588, Venice)
Paolo Caliari became known as Veronese after his birthplace.
Though first apprenticed as a stonecutter, his father’s trade, he showed such a marked interest in painting that in his 14th year he was apprenticed to a painter named Antonio Badile, whose daughter Elena he later married.
From Badile Veronese derived a sound basic painting technique as well as a passion for paintings in which people and architecture were integrated.
The style of his first known work, the Bevilacqua-Lazise Altarpiece, reflects Badile’s influence.
Veronese was attracted by Mannerist art and studied the works of Giulio Romano, Raphael, Parmigianino, and Michelangelo.
Fragments of a fresco decoration executed by Veronese in 1551 for the Villa Soranza in Treville, with their elegant decorative figures, suggest that he was already creating a new idiom.
The influence of Michelangelo is evident in a splendid canvas, Temptation of St. Anthony, painted in 1552 for the cathedral of Mantua.
In 1553 Veronese was introduced to Venice and launched on a long collaboration with the Venetian authorities in connection with the decoration of different parts of the Palazzo Ducale.
The first of these commissions, the partitioned ceiling of the Sala del Consiglio dei Dieci (Hall of the Council of Ten), reveals characteristics of Veronese’s mature style: skillful foreshortenings that make figures appear to be actually floating in space above the viewer, chromatic splendour, and luminous passages that endow even the shadows with colour.
In 1555, probably at the summons of the prior of S. Sebastiano in Venice, Veronese began the decoration of the church that was later to become his burial place.
Whereas in the Palazzo Ducale he had often collaborated with Giambattista Zelotti, Veronese worked alone in S. Sebastiano.
In the Story of Esther, depicted on the ceiling, appear the first of his rigorous compositions of foreshortened groups in luminous architectural frameworks and his decorative fancies that juxtapose animated, almost stereometric (i.e., having an almost measurable volume) foregrounds and background figures wrought with a few strokes of light.
The skilled fresco painter, who had worked in the villas and palaces of Venetian noblemen, including the beautiful boudoir of the Trevisan family in Murano, recounted the stories of St. Sebastian in elegantly fluent frescoes painted for the church (1558).
In his decoration of the two shutters of the organ (1559), he again revealed his mastery of rhythmic composition and illusionistic perspective through extreme foreshortening.
Contemporaneously with the decoration of S. Sebastiano, Veronese received numerous commissions for altarpieces, devotional paintings, and some Last Suppers.
The theme of the latter - depicted in such paintings as The Pilgrims of Emmaus and Feast in the House of Levi - allowed him to compose large groups of figures in increasingly complex Renaissance architectural settings that attest to his knowledge of the works of the 16th-century Venetian architects Michele Sanmicheli, Andrea Palladio, and Jacopo Sansovino.
The decoration of the villa at Maser (1561), built by Palladio for Daniele and Marcantonio Barbaro, the former a scholar and translator of the works of the Roman architect Vitruvius, marked a fundamental stage in the evolution of the art of Veronese and in the development of Venetian painting.
Assisted by his brother Benedetto in the execution of the architectural framework, Paolo brilliantly interpreted the villa’s Palladian rhythms, breaking through the walls with illusionistic landscapes and opening the ceilings to blue skies with figures from classical mythology.
Mannerism had given way to harmonious rhythms and a superb handling of colour that imbued his frescoes with glowing vitality: the mythological scenes exalting human pleasures, the depiction of Barbaro’s wife with the children and the wet nurse, and the landscapes, rendered in illusionistic perspective and detailed with classic ruins.
The classic compositions at Maser were succeeded by paintings with a tendency to monumentality and with a love for decorative pomp, as in The Marriage at Cana, executed in 1562 and 1563 for the refectory of S. Giorgio Maggiore.
In this work the planes are multiplied, space is dilated, and an assembly of people is accumulated in complex but ordered movements.
The wealth of whimsical and novel narrative details characteristically incorporated into Veronese’s paintings and particularly in the Last Supper commissioned in 1573 by the convent of Saints Giovanni e Paolo aroused the suspicion of the Inquisition’s tribunal of the Holy Office, which summoned Veronese to defend the painting.
The tribunal objected to the painting on grounds that it included irreverent elements, inappropriate to the holiness of the event; for example, a dog, a jester holding a parrot, and a servant with a bleeding nose.
Veronese adroitly and staunchly defended the artist’s right to freedom of imagination, and the issue was resolved by a change of title.
The nocturnal tone in the Adoration of the Kings in the church of Sta.
Corona (Vicenza) endows the painting with a new intimacy, without renunciation of the characteristic Veronesian richness of colour, laid on with the minute, precious brushstrokes also used in small canvases executed during this period.
These paintings represent the most authentic expressions of the last 15 years of Veronese’s life; for discernible in the large decorations for the Palazzo Ducale begun during this period - including the Rape of Europa and the Apotheosis of Venice - is a greater participation of his workshop.
In 1588 Veronese contracted a fever and died after a few days of illness.
His sons Carlo and Gabriele continued their father’s work, signing it haeredes Pauli (“Paul’s heirs”).
They were able to make use of a quantity of splendid sketches and drawings.
Among Veronese’s last works were superb allegorical fables, such as a series for Rudolph II that included The Choice of Hercules and Allegory of Wisdom and Strength; and Mars and Venus United by Love.
His final work also included biblical scenes with agitated, gloomy landscapes.
A pathos-filled small altarpiece of St. Pantaleon Healing a Sick Boy and versions of the Pietà exhibit a dramatic quality and a meditative mood unusual in Veronese’s works.
SOFONISBA ANGUISSOLA (b. c. 1532, Cremona [Italy] - d.
November 1625, Palermo)
Sofonisba Anguissola was a Late Renaissance painter best known for her portraiture.
She was one of the first known female artists and one of the first women artists to establish an international reputation.
Among other female painters, she was unusual in that her father was a nobleman rather than a painter.
The oldest of seven - six girls and one boy - Anguissola was born into a wealthy family.
Like a true Renaissance man, her father, Amilcare Anguissola, was guided by the words of Baldassare Castiglione in Il cortegiano (The Courtier) not least in his consideration regarding the proper education of a young woman.
In 1546 both Sofonisba and Elena, his second daughter, were sent to board in the household of Bernardino Campi, a prominent local painter.
They remained under instruction with Campi for three years until he moved from Cremona to Milan.
Sofonisba continued her training with Bernardino Gatti, through whom she gained an appreciation of the work of Correggio.
During this period of her life, through the influence of her father, she also received encouragement from Michelangelo, copying a drawing he sent her and sending it to him for his appraisal.
While beginning to earn a living, Sofonisba also taught her sisters Lucia, Europa, and Anna Maria to paint.
About 30 of her paintings from this period, including many self-portraits and the well-known Lucia, Minerva, and Europa Anguissola Playing Chess (1555), survived into the 21st century.
Anguissola’s reputation spread, and in 1559 she was invited to Madrid, to the court of Philip II, where in addition to painting portraits she was an attendant to the Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia (later the archduchess of Austria) and a lady-in-waiting to Philip’s third wife, Elizabeth of Valois.
Most of Anguissola’s paintings of this period are no longer extant, having burned in a fire in the Prado during the 17th century.
About 1571, while still in Madrid and with a dowry provided by the king, she married a Sicilian, Fabrizio de Moncada.
Although she was once thought to have settled with him in Sicily, recent scholarship suggests that she may have remained in Spain after her marriage.
She was widowed about 1579.
Aboard a ship bound for Cremona late in 1579, Anguissola met the captain, a Genoese nobleman by the name of Orazio Lomellino, and in January 1580 she married him.
From 1584 until about 1616–20 the couple is known to have lived in Genoa.
During this later period, she was influenced by the work of the Genoese painter Luca Cambiaso.
Her work, like that of many early female painters, was often attributed to male painters of the period, in Anguissola’s case painters as various as Titian, Leonardo da Vinci, Giovanni Battista Moroni, Alonso Sánchez Coello, and Francisco de Zurbarán.
Near the end of her life, on July 12, 1624, she was visited by the young Flemish painter Anthony Van Dyck, who recorded her advice to him and sketched the elderly painter in his notebook.
<Caption> Anguissola portrayed her sisters at play, overseen by a servant in a painting titled Lucia, Minerva, and Europa Anguissola Playing Chess.
Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY
Doubtless Anguissola was among the most accomplished painters of the Late Renaissance.
No less a commentator than Giorgio Vasari, who saw her work in her father’s house in 1566, noted in his Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects that she had “worked with deeper study and greater grace than any woman of our times at problems of design, for not only has she learned to draw, paint, and copy from nature, and reproduce most skillfully works by other artists, but she has on her own painted some most rare and beautiful paintings.”
NORTHERN RENAISSANCE PAINTERS
For the sake of convenience, scholars often separate the painters of the Italian Renaissance from those of the more northern regions.
The biographies here include artists from what are now the countries of Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands, France, and Spain.
EARLY RENAISSANCE
The Medici family dominated Florence for about 60 years.
They traded in all of the major cities in Europe, and one of the most famous masterpieces of Northern Renaissance art, the Portinari Altarpiece by Hugo van der Goes (c. 1476), was commissioned by a Medici agent, Tommaso Portinari.
Instead of being painted with the customary tempera of the period, the work is painted with translucent oil glazes that produce brilliant jewel-like colour and a glossy surface.
Early Northern Renaissance painters were more concerned with the detailed reproduction of objects and their symbolic meaning than with the study of scientific perspective and anatomy even after these achievements became widely known.
On the other hand, central Italian painters began to adopt the oil painting medium soon after the Portinari Altarpiece was brought to Florence in 1476.
ROBERT CAMPIN (b. c. 1378, Tournai, France - d.
April 26, 1444, Tournai)
Documents show that Robert Campin was established as a master painter in Tournai in 1406.
Two pupils are mentioned as entering his studio in 1427 - Rogelet de la Pasture (generally identified with the great Rogier van der Weyden) and Jacques Daret.
The only documented work by Jacques Daret, an altarpiece executed for the Abbey of St. Vaast near Arras, shows close stylistic analogies with works by Rogier van der Weyden on one hand and works earlier in style by the Master of Flémalle on the other.
Both seem to proceed from common models, for they obviously are not copies of one another.
As the Tournai records give the name of Campin as master of both Daret and Rogier, it has been generally assumed that the Master of Flémalle may be reasonably identified with Campin.
Some scholars, however, have stylistically considered the works ascribed to the Master of Flémalle as early works by Rogier himself.
Campin’s art is indebted to that of manuscript illumination, but his work displays greater powers of observation and ability to render plastic forms than is found in contemporary manuscript illumination.
One of his masterpieces is the Mérode Altarpiece (c. 1428), a triptych of the Annunciation with the donors and St. Joseph on the wings.
The Virgin is portrayed in a setting of bourgeois realism in which interior furnishings are rendered with the frank and loving attention to detail that was to become a characteristic tradition of Flemish art.
Another important work consists of two wings of an altarpiece dating c. 1440 that are said to have come from the Abbey of Flémalle.
They depict the Virgin and Child and St. Veronica (with the Holy Trinity on the reverse).
Among other works generally ascribed to Campin are the Virgin and Child Before a Firescreen and a double portrait at the National Gallery, London, a Nativity dated c. 1430, and the Werl Altarpiece (1438).
TRÈS RICHES HEURES DU DUC DE BERRY
The illuminated book of hours (a popular form of private prayer book of the period) called Très Riches Heures du duc de Berry, one of the landmarks of the art of book illumination, did much to influence the course that Early Netherlandish art would take during the 15th century.
The book was the work of three Dutch brothers whose family name is given variously as Limbourg (Limburg, de Lymborch, van Limburg) or Malouel (Maelwael), all born in the mid-to-late 1380s.
As descendants of artist-artisans on both maternal and paternal sides, the brothers would have had much exposure to materials and processes of art production.
Probably in 1405, while all three were still in their teens, they entered the service of their first patron’s brother Jean de France, duc de Berry.
It was for him that this lavishly illustrated book was produced.
The illustration for May from Les Très Riches Heures du duc de Berry, manuscript illuminated by the Limbourg brothers, 1416; in the Musée Condé, Chantilly, France.
Courtesy of the Musée Condé, Chantilly, Fr.;
photograph, Giraudon/Art Resource, New York
Considered the greatest of the works they produced, it ranks among the supreme examples of the International Gothic style.
It displays their tremendous skill and expansive sensibilities in every detail.
Their elegant and sophisticated approach combined naturalism of detail with overall decorative effect.
Their work on this volume seems to reflect their special relationship to the duke, and the book’s images reveal their intimate knowledge of the duke’s daily life.
They were among the first illuminators to render specific landscape scenes (such as the environs and appearance of their patron’s castles) with great accuracy and sensitivity.
Through their travels with the duke and their presence in the life of the court, they gained an awareness of the most-progressive international currents of the time.
They left the Très Riches Heures unfinished when all three died suddenly, perhaps during an outbreak of the plague early in 1416.
Characterized by a naturalistic conception of form and a poetic representation of the objects of daily life, Campin’s work marks the break with the prevailing International Gothic style and prefigures the achievements of Jan van Eyck and the painters of the Northern Renaissance.
JAN VAN EYCK (b. before 1395, Maaseik, Bishopric of Liège, Holy Roman Empire [now in Belgium] - d.
before July 9, 1441, Bruges)
Jan van Eyck must have been born before 1395, for in October 1422 he is recorded as the varlet de chambre et peintre (“honorary equerry and painter”) of John of Bavaria, count of Holland.
He continued to work in the palace of The Hague until the count’s death in 1425 and then settled briefly in Bruges before he was summoned, that summer, to Lille to serve Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, the most powerful ruler and foremost patron of the arts in Flanders.
Jan remained in the duke’s employ until his death.
On behalf of his sponsor he undertook a number of secret missions during the next decade, of which the most notable were two journeys to the Iberian Peninsula, the first in 1427 to try to contract a marriage for Philip with Isabella of Spain and a more successful trip in 1428–29 to seek the hand of Isabella of Portugal.
As a confidant of Philip, Jan may have participated directly in these marriage negotiations, but he also was charged to present the duke with a portrait of the intended.
In 1431 Jan purchased a house in Bruges and, about the same time, married a woman named Margaret, about whom little more is known than that she was born in 1406 and was to have at least two children with him.
Residing in Bruges, Jan continued to paint, and in 1436 he again made a secret voyage for Philip.
Securely attributed paintings survive only from the last decade of Jan’s career; therefore, his artistic origins and early development must be deduced from his mature work.
Traditionally, Jan has been acclaimed the founder of Flemish painting, and scholars have sought his artistic roots in the last great phase of medieval manuscript illumination.
It is clear that the naturalism and elegant composition of Jan’s later painting owe much to such early 15th-century illuminators as the anonymous Boucicaut Master and the Limbourg brothers, who worked for the Burgundian dukes.
Certainly as important for Jan’s artistic formation were the panel paintings of Robert Campin (c. 1378–1444), a Tournai painter whose important role in the history of Flemish art has only relatively recently been reestablished.
Jan must have met Campin at least once, when he was feted by the Tournai painter’s guild in 1427, and from Campin’s art he seems to have learned the bold realism, the method of disguised symbolism, and perhaps the luminous oil technique that became so characteristic of his own style.
In contrast to Campin, who was a Tournai burgher, Jan was a learned master at work in a busy court, and he signed his paintings, the first Flemish artist to do so.
The majority of Jan’s panels present the proud inscription “IOHANNES DE EYCK,” and several bear his aristocratic motto, “Als ik kan” (“As best I can”).
It is small wonder that Campin’s reputation faded and his influence on Jan was forgotten, and it is of little surprise that many of Campin’s achievements were credited to the younger master.
Despite Jan van Eyck’s having signed nine paintings and dated 10, the establishment of his oeuvre and the reconstruction of its chronology present problems.
The major difficulty is that Jan’s masterpiece, the Adoration of the Lamb altarpiece, has a wholly questionable inscription that introduces Hubert van Eyck as its principal master.
This has caused art historians to turn to more secure works to plot Jan’s development, including, most notably: the Portrait of a Young Man (Leal Souvenir) of 1432, The Marriage of Giovanni Arnolfini and Giovanna Cenami of 1434, the Madonna with Canon van der Paele of 1434–36, the triptych Madonna and Child with Saints of 1437, and the panels of St. Barbara and the Madonna at the Fountain, dated, respectively, 1437 and 1439.
Although they fall within a brief span of seven years, these paintings present a consistent development in which Jan moved from the heavy, sculptural realism associated with Robert Campin to a more delicate, rather precious, pictorial style.
On stylistic grounds there seems little difficulty in placing the Ghent Altarpiece at the head of this development as indicated by the date 1432 in the inscription, but the question of Hubert’s participation in this great work has yet to be resolved.
The inscription itself is definite about this point: “The painter Hubert van Eyck, greater than whom no one was found, began [this work]; and Jan, his brother, second in art [carried] through the task . . . ”
On the basis of this claim, art historians have attempted to distinguish Hubert’s contribution to the Ghent Altarpiece and have even assigned to him certain of the more archaic “Eyckian” paintings, including The Annunciation and The Three Marys at the Tomb.
A problem arises, however, because the inscription itself is a 16th-century transcription, and earlier references make no mention of Hubert.
Albrecht Dürer, for instance, praised only Jan van Eyck during his visit to Ghent in 1521; and as late as 1562 the Flemish historian Marcus van Vaernewyck referred to Jan alone as the creator of the altarpiece.
Furthermore, a recent philological study casts serious doubt on the dependability of the inscription.
Thus, Hubert’s participation is highly suspect, and any knowledge of his art must await new discoveries.
<Caption> Gothic mirror, detail from The Marriage of Giovanni Arnolfini and Giovanna Cenami by Jan van Eyck, 1434; in the National Gallery, London.
Reproduced by permission of the trustees of the National Gallery, London
On the other hand, there is little doubt that Hubert did exist.
A “meester Hubrechte de scildere” (Master Hubert, the painter) is mentioned three times in the City Archives of Ghent, and a transcription of his epitaph reports that he died on Sept. 18, 1426.
Whether this Hubert van Eyck was related to Jan and why in the 16th century he was credited with the major share of the Ghent Altarpiece are questions that remain unanswered.
The confusion concerning his relationship to Hubert, the doubt about his activities as an illuminator, and the reemergence of Robert Campin as a preeminent master do not diminish the achievement and significance of Jan van Eyck.
He may not have invented painting with oils as early writers asserted, but he perfected the technique to mirror the textures, light, and spatial effects of nature.
The realism of his paintings has never been surpassed.
For Jan, as for Campin, naturalism was not merely a technical tour de force, however.
For him, nature embodied God, and so he filled his paintings with religious symbols disguised as everyday objects.
Even the light that so naturally illuminates Jan van Eyck’s landscapes and interiors is a metaphor of the Divine.
ROGIER VAN DER WEYDEN (b. 1399/1400, Tournai, France - d.
June 18, 1464, Brussels [Belgium])
Rogier de la Pasture was the son of a master cutler, and his childhood must have been spent in the comfortable surroundings of the rising class of merchants and craftsmen.
He may even have acquired a university education, for in 1426 he was honoured by the city as “Maistre (Master) Rogier de la Pasture” and began his painting career only the next year at the rather advanced age of 27.
It was then, on March 5, 1427, that Rogier enrolled as an apprentice in the workshop of Robert Campin, the foremost painter in Tournai and dean of the painters’ guild.
Rogier remained in Campin’s atelier for five years, becoming an independent master of the guild on Aug. 1, 1432.
From Campin, Rogier learned the ponderous, detailed realism that characterizes his earliest paintings, and so alike, in fact, are the styles of these two masters that connoisseurs still do not agree on the attribution of certain works.
Campin was not the only source of inspiration in Rogier’s art.
Jan van Eyck, the great painter from Bruges, also profoundly affected the developing artist, introducing elegance and subtle visual refinements into the bolder, Campinesque components of Rogier’s early paintings.
Although as an apprentice Rogier must certainly have met Jan van Eyck when the latter visited Tournai in 1427, it was more likely in Bruges, where Rogier may have resided between 1432 and 1435, that he became thoroughly acquainted with van Eyck’s style.
By 1435, Rogier, now a mature master, settled in Brussels, the native city of his wife, Elizabeth Goffaert, whom he had married in 1426.
The next year he was appointed city painter; and it was from this time that he began to use the Flemish translation of his name (van der Weyden).
Rogier remained in Brussels the rest of his life, although he never completely severed his ties with Tournai.
During 1435–40, he completed the celebrated panel of the Descent from the Cross for the chapel of the Archers’ Guild of Louvain.
In this deposition there is evident a tendency to reduce the setting of a scene to a shallow, shrinelike enclosure and to orchestrate a rich diversity of emotions.
These devotional qualities are even more striking in Rogier’s works of the 1440s such as the twin Granada-Miraflores altarpieces and the Last Judgment polyptych.
In these the settings are stark, the figures are delicate Gothic types, and the action, though stilled, is exquisitely expressive.
The removal of Rogier’s art from concern with outward appearances and his return to medieval conventions is surprising; for it was during this decade that Rogier’s international reputation was secured and commissions increased from noblemen such as Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, and his powerful chancellor, Nicolas Rolin.
Perhaps as an extension of a journey to install the Last Judgment altarpiece in Rolin’s chapel at Beaune or possibly to obtain a plenary indulgence for his daughter Margaret, one of Rogier’s four children, who had died that year, the renowned painter visited Rome during the Jubilee of 1450.
He was warmly received there, and he accepted commissions from the powerful Este family of Ferrara and the Medici of Florence.
He painted a portrait of Francesco d’Este, and his painting of the Madonna and Child that still remains in Florence bears the arms and patron saints of the Medici.
While on his pilgrimage, Rogier apparently tutored Italian masters in painting with oils, a technique in which Flemish painters of the time were particularly adept.
He also seems to have learned a great deal from what he viewed.
Although he was primarily attracted to the conservative painters Gentile da Fabriano and Fra Angelico, whose medievalizing styles paralleled his own, Rogier was also acquainted with more progressive trends.
In the St. John altarpiece and the Seven Sacraments triptych, executed between 1451 and 1455, shortly after Rogier’s return north, his characteristic austerity is tempered by his recollection of the more robust Italian styles.
Despite this enrichment, however, Rogier’s conceptions remained essentially iconic: he pushed the figures into the foreground and isolated them from their surroundings as subjects for devotion.
The last 15 years of his life brought Rogier numerous commissions, which he carried out with the assistance of a large workshop that included his own son Peter.
Even before his death, however, Rogier’s impact extended far beyond his immediate associates.
The influence of his expressive but technically less intricate style eclipsed that of both Campin and van Eyck.
Every Flemish painter of the succeeding generation - Petrus Christus, Dieric Bouts, Hugo van der Goes, and Hans Memling (who may have studied in Rogier’s atelier) - depended on his formulations; and, during the 16th century, Rogierian ideas were transformed and revitalized by Quentin Massys and Bernard van Orley.
Rogier’s art was also a vehicle for transporting the Flemish style throughout Europe, and during the second half of the 15th century his influence dominated painting in France, Germany, and Spain.
DIERIC BOUTS (b. c. 1415, Haarlem, Holland [now in the Netherlands] - d.
May 6, 1475, Louvain, Brabant [now Leuven, Belgium])
Little is known of Dieric (also rendered variously as Dierick, Dirk, Dirck, and Thierry) Bouts’s early years in Haarlem, although it is possible that he studied in Brussels with Rogier van der Weyden, whose influence is obvious in his early works.
In 1448 Bouts visited Louvain (in what is now Belgium), where he married the daughter of a local merchant.
After 1457 his name appeared almost every year in the archives of Louvain.
Bouts’s earlier works, dated on stylistic evidence before 1457, are strongly Rogierian in their expression of intense emotion through symbolic gestures.
However, the overall design of Bouts’s early works shows the influence of the elegant and intellectual van Eyck.
In the paintings ascribed to Bouts’s mature period after he settled in Louvain, Rogier’s influence gives way to a greater severity and dignity in the treatment of figures; there is a shift toward grander, more allegorical subjects as well.
The facial expressions of the figures in those paintings show an extraordinary restraint that appears as a deliberately controlled intensity with great spiritual effect.
Bouts’s two best-known works, which exemplify his mature style, belong to the last 20 years of his life.
One, ordered by the Confraternity of the Holy Sacrament for the Church of St. Peter in Louvain in 1464, is a triptych, the two side panels of which are divided in half horizontally.
The central panel represents the Last Supper, and the side panels show four scenes from the Hebrew Bible that foreshadow the institution of the Eucharist, the ritual commemoration of the Last Supper: the Feast of the Passover, Elijah in the Desert, the Gathering of Manna, and Abraham and Melchisedek.
The second painting, commissioned by the city of Louvain in 1468, the year in which Bouts became official painter to the city, was to be an ambitious project on the theme of the Last Judgment, but the work remained uncompleted at Bouts’s death.
HANS MEMLING (b. c. 1430/35, Seligenstadt, near Frankfurt am Main [Germany] - d.
August 11, 1494, Bruges [Belgium])
Hans Memling (Memlinc), born in the region of the Middle Rhine, was apparently first schooled in the art of Cologne and then traveled to the Low Countries (c. 1455–60).
He settled in Bruges (now Brugge, Belgium) in 1465; there he established a large shop and executed numerous altarpieces and portraits.
Indeed, he was very successful in Bruges: it is known that he owned a large stone house and by 1480 was listed among the wealthiest citizens on the city tax accounts.
Sometime between 1470 and 1480 Memling married Anna de Valkenaere (died 1487), with whom he had three children.
A number of Memling’s works are signed and dated, and still others allow art historians to place them easily into a chronology on the basis of the patron depicted in them.
Otherwise it is very difficult to discern an early, middle, and late style for the artist.
His Madonnas gradually become slenderer and more ethereal and self-conscious, and a greater use of Italian motifs such as putti (chubby child figures often having wings), garlands, and sculptural detail marks the later works.
His portraits, too, appear to develop from a type with a simple neutral background to those enhanced with a loggia or window view of a landscape, but these, too, may have been less a stylistic development than an adaptation of his compositions to suit the tastes of his patrons.
Memling’s art clearly reveals the influence of contemporary Flemish painters.
He borrowed, for example, from the compositions of Jan van Eyck, the famed founder of the Bruges school.
The influence of Dieric Bouts and Hugo van der Goes can also be discerned in his works - for example, in a number of eye-catching details such as glistening mirrors, tile floors, canopied beds, exotic hangings, and brocaded robes.
Above all, Memling’s art reveals a thorough knowledge of, and dependence on, compositions and figure types created by Rogier van der Weyden.
In Memling’s large triptych (a painting in three panels, generally hinged together) of the Adoration of the Magi, one of his earliest works, and in the altarpiece of 1479 for Jan Floreins, the influence of Rogier’s last masterpiece, the Columba Altarpiece (1460–64), is especially noticeable.
He also utilized Rogier’s compositions in numerous representations of the half-length Madonna and Child, often including a pendant with the donor’s portrait (as in the Madonna and Martin van Nieuwenhove).
Devotional diptychs (two-panel paintings) of this type were common in 15th-century Flanders.
They consist of a portrait of the “donor” - or patron - in one panel, reverently gazing at the Madonna and Child in the other.
Such paintings were for the donor’s personal use in his home or travels.
Most of Memling’s patrons were those associated with religious houses, such as the Hospital of St. John in Bruges, and wealthy businessmen, including burghers of Bruges and foreign representatives of the Florentine Medicis and the Hanseatic League (an association of German merchants dealing abroad).
For Tommaso Portinari, an agent of the Medici family, and his wife, Memling painted portraits and an unusual altarpiece that depicts more than 22 scenes from the Passion of Christ scattered in miniature in a panoramic landscape encompassing a view of Jerusalem.
His best known work with extensive narration is the sumptuous Shrine of St. Ursula in the Hospital of St. John.
It was commissioned by two nuns, Jacosa van Dudzeele and Anna van den Moortele, who are portrayed at one end of the composition kneeling before Mary.
This reliquary, completed in 1489, is in the form of a diminutive chapel with six painted panels filling the areas along the sides where stained glass would ordinarily be placed.
The narrative, which is the story of Ursula and her 11,000 virgins and their trip from Cologne to Rome and back, unfolds with charm and colourful detail.
Other patrons of the same hospital commissioned Memling to paint a large altarpiece of St. John with the mystical marriage of St. Catherine to Christ as the central theme.
Memling was much acclaimed in his own lifetime.
Recording his death, the notary of Bruges described him as “the most skillful painter in the whole of Christendom.”
Yet because Memling’s work was so strongly influenced by that of other painters, it often was harshly dealt with by mid-20th-century critics.
Since that time, however, his reputation has continued to rise.
He is considered a major northern Renaissance artist.
HUGO VAN DER GOES (b. c. 1440, Ghent [now in Belgium] - d.
1482, Roode Kloster, near Brussels [now in Belgium])
Early sources disagree about van der Goes’s birthplace, with Ghent, Antwerp, Bruges, and Leiden mentioned as potential candidates.
Nothing is known of his life before 1467, when he was accepted as a master in the painters’ guild in Ghent.
From then until 1475 he received many commissions from the town of Ghent and provided decorations (heraldic shields, processional banners, etc.)
for such occasions as the marriage of Charles the Bold in Bruges (1468) and the transference of the remains of Philip the Good to Dijon (1473).
In 1474 he was elected dean of the guild, but the following year - when he was at the climax of his career - he decided to enter Roode Kloster, a priory near Brussels, as a lay brother.
There he continued to paint and received distinguished visitors; he also undertook journeys.
In 1481 a tendency to acute depression culminated in a mental breakdown during which he tried to kill himself.
An account of the artist’s last years at Roode Kloster, written by a monk, Gaspar Ofhuys (who apparently resented some of van der Goes’s privileges), has survived.
Van der Goes’s masterpiece, and his only securely documented work, is the large triptych usually known as the Portinari Altarpiece (c. 1474–76) with a scene called The Adoration of the Shepherds on the centre panel.
It was commissioned by Tommaso Portinari, who is portrayed with his family on the wings.
One of the greatest of the early examples of northern realism, it yet subordinates this quality to spiritual content, uses still-life detail with symbolic intent, and shows unprecedented psychological insight in portraiture, especially in the faces of the awe-struck shepherds and the Portinari children.
It achieves an emotional intensity unprecedented in Flemish painting.
Soon after its completion it was taken to Florence, where its rich colours and careful attention to detail impressed many Italian artists.
Van der Goes’s earlier and more tentative style shows that he had studied the leading Netherlandish masters of the first half of the 15th century.
A diptych (begun about 1467) reflected in the Fall of Man an awareness of Jan van Eyck’s Ghent Altarpiece, while the Lamentation is reminiscent of Rogier van der Weyden.
A comparison between the large Adoration of the Magi and The Nativity reveals the direction in which van der Goes’s later works were to evolve.
The Adoration is spatially rational, compositionally tranquil, and harmonious in colour.
By contrast, the Nativity (also called Adoration of the Shepherds), a later work painted on a elongated panel, is disturbing even in its format - an emotionally charged supernatural drama on an uncomfortably low stage revealed by the drawing of curtains.
This exploitation of space and colour for emotional potentiality rather than rational effect characterizes van der Goes’s later works.
It appears in the Holy Trinity Adored by Sir Edward Bonkil and The Royal Family of Scotland, panels that were probably designed as organ shutters (c. 1478–79), and culminates in the Death of the Virgin, executed not long before van der Goes’s death.
The unearthly colours of this work are particularly disturbing, and its poignancy is intensified by the controlled grief seen in the faces of the Apostles, who are placed in irrationally conceived space.
Van der Goes’s art, with its affinities to Mannerism, and his tortured personality found a particularly sympathetic response in the 20th and 21st centuries.
HIËRONYMUS BOSCH (b. c. 1450, ’s-Hertogenbosch, Brabant [now in the Netherlands] - d.
Aug. 9, 1516, ’s-Hertogenbosch)
Hiëronymus Bosch (Jheronimus Bos) is the pseudonym of Jeroen van Aeken (Aquen, Aken).
He was a pessimistic and stern moralist who had neither illusions about the rationality of human nature nor confidence in the kindness of a world that had been corrupted by human presence in it.
His paintings are sermons, addressed often to initiates and consequently difficult to translate.
Most contemporary scholars view Bosch as a talented artist who possessed deep insight into human character and as one of the first artists to represent abstract concepts in his work.
An exact chronology of Bosch’s surviving work is difficult because, of the approximately 35 to 40 paintings attributed to him, only 7 are signed and none are dated.
There exists little documentary information on the early life of the artist, other than the fact that he was the son and grandson of accomplished painters.
His name does appear on the register of the Brotherhood of Our Lady, located in the city of his birth, and there is mention of him in official records from 1486 until the year of his death, when he was acclaimed an Insignis pictor (“distinguished painter”).
In addition to painting he undertook decorative works and altarpieces and executed designs for stained glass.
Works attributed to his youthful period show an awkwardness in drawing and composition and brushwork somewhat limited in its scope.
Such paintings as The Cure of Folly, Crucifixion, The Adoration of the Magi, The Seven Deadly Sins, The Marriage at Cana, Ecce Homo, and The Conjurer are representative of this period.
The presence of certain motifs, expanded in the more sophisticated works of the artist’s middle period, and a limited technique, unsure yet bold, provide a beginning from which to view Bosch’s artistic origins.
Between the first painting in this early group, The Cure of Folly, and the last, The Conjurer, a steady development can be seen.
The iconography of the latter is more complex, and the characteristic themes that received their fullest expression in the great masterpieces of his late period have begun to emerge.
In these early paintings Bosch had begun to depict humanity’s vulnerability to the temptation of evil, the deceptive allure of sin, and the obsessive attraction of lust, heresy, and obscenity.
In calm and prosaic settings, groups of people exemplify the credulity, ignorance, and absurdities of the human race.
However, the imagery of the early works is still relatively conventional, with only an occasional intrusion of the bizarre in the form of a lurking demon or a strangely dressed magician.
To Bosch’s fruitful middle period belong the great panoramic triptychs such as the Hay Wain, The Temptation of St. Anthony, and the Garden of Earthly Delights.
His figures are graceful and his colours subtle and sure, and all is in motion in these ambitious and extremely complex works.
These paintings are marked by an eruption of fantasy, expressed in monstrous, apocalyptic scenes of chaos and nightmare that are contrasted and juxtaposed with idyllic portrayals of humankind in the age of innocence.
During this period Bosch elaborated on his early ideas, and the few paintings that survive establish the evolution of his thought.
Bosch’s disconcerting mixture of fantasy and reality is further developed in the Hay Wain, the outside wings, or cover panels, of which recall the scenes of The Seven Deadly Sins.
The cursive style that he worked out for the triptych resembles that of watercolour.
In the central panel, a rendition of the Flemish proverb “The world is a haystack from which each takes what he can,” Bosch shows the trickery of the demon who guides the procession of people from the earthly paradise depicted on the left wing to the horrors of hell shown on the right one.
Bosch’s The Temptation of St. Anthony displays his ascent to stylistic maturity.
The brushstrokes are sharper and terser, with much more command than before.
The composition becomes more fluid, and space is regulated by the incidents and creatures that the viewer’s attention is focused on.
His mastery of fine brush-point calligraphy, permitting subtle nuances of contour and movement, is fully evident.
Bosch portrays the human struggle against temptation, as well as the omnipresence of the Devil, in his St. Anthony, one of the best keys to the artist’s personal iconography.
The hermit saint in this work is cast as the heroic symbol of humanity.
In the central panel St. Anthony is beset by an array of grotesque demons, their horrible bodies being brilliantly visualized amalgamations of human, animal, vegetable, and inanimate parts.
In the background is a hellish, fantastically bizarre landscape painted with the most exquisite detail.
Bosch’s development of the theme of the charlatan deceiving a man and taking away his salvation receives its fullest exposition in the St. Anthony, with its condemnation of heresy and the seductions of false doctrines.
The Garden of Earthly Delights, representative of Bosch at his mature best, shows the earthly paradise with the creation of woman, the first temptation, and the fall.
The painting’s beautiful and unsettling images of sensuality and of the dreams that afflict the people who live in a pleasure-seeking world express Bosch’s iconographic originality with tremendous force.
The chief characteristic of this work is perhaps its dreamlike quality; multitudes of nude human figures, giant birds, and horses cavort and frolic in a delightfully implausible, otherworldly landscape, and all the elements come together to produce a perfect, harmonious whole.
Bosch’s late works are fundamentally different.
The scale changes radically, and, instead of meadows or hellish landscapes inhabited by hundreds of tiny beings, he painted densely compacted groups of half-length figures pressed tight against the picture plane.
In these dramatic close-ups, of which The Crowning with Thorns and the Carrying of the Cross are representative, spectators are so near the event portrayed that they seem to participate in it physically as well as psychologically.
The most peaceful and untroubled of Bosch’s mature works depict various saints in contemplation or repose.
Among these works are St. John the Evangelist in Patmos and St. Jerome in Prayer.
HIGH AND LATE RENAISSANCE
The High and Late Renaissance was as striking in the northern regions as it was in Italy.
It, too, produced some of the most iconic images in the history of Western painting.
ALBRECHT DÜRER (b. May 21, 1471, Imperial Free City of Nürnberg [Germany] - d.
April 6, 1528, Nürnberg)
Albrecht Dürer began his training as a draughtsman in the goldsmith’s workshop of his father.
His precocious skill is evidenced by a remarkable self-portrait done in 1484, when he was 13 years old, and by a Madonna with Musical Angels, done in 1485, which is already a finished work of art in the late Gothic style.
In 1486 Dürer’s father arranged for his apprenticeship to the painter and woodcut illustrator Michael Wohlgemuth, whose portrait Dürer would paint in 1516.
After three years in Wohlgemuth’s workshop, he left for a period of travel.
In 1490 Dürer completed his earliest known painting, a portrait of his father that heralds the familiar characteristic style of the mature master.
Dürer’s years as a journeyman probably took the young artist to the Low Countries, to Alsace, and to Basel, Switzerland, where he completed his first authenticated woodcut, a picture of St. Jerome Curing the Lion.
During 1493 or 1494 Dürer was in Strasbourg for a short time, returning again to Basel to design several book illustrations.
An early masterpiece from this period is a 1493 self-portrait with a thistle painted on parchment.
<Caption> Self-Portrait in Furred Coat, oil on wood panel by Albrecht Dürer, 1500; in the Alte Pinakothek, Munich.
Alte Pinakothek, Munich; photograph, Blauel/Gnamm - Artothek
FIRST JOURNEY TO ITALY
At the end of May 1494, Dürer returned to Nürnberg, where he soon married Agnes Frey, the daughter of a merchant.
In the autumn of 1494 Dürer seems to have undertaken his first journey to Italy, where he remained until the spring of 1495.
A number of bold landscape watercolours made on this journey are among Dürer’s most beautiful creations.
Depicting segments of landscape scenery cleverly chosen for their compositional values, they are painted with broad strokes, in places roughly sketched in, with an amazing harmonization of detail.
Dürer used predominantly unmixed, cool, sombre colours to suggest depth and atmosphere.
The trip to Italy had a strong effect on Dürer.
While in Venice and perhaps also before he went to Italy, Dürer saw engravings by masters from central Italy.
He was most influenced by the Florentine Antonio Pollaiuolo, with his sinuous, energetic line studies of the human body in motion, and by the Venetian Andrea Mantegna, an artist greatly preoccupied with classical themes and with precise linear articulation of the human figure.
Dürer’s secular, allegorical, and frequently self-enamoured paintings of this period are often either adaptations of Italian models or entirely independent creations that breathe the free spirit of the new age of the Renaissance.
Dürer adapted the figure of Hercules from Pollaiuolo’s The Rape of Deianira for a painting of Hercules and the Birds of Stymphalis.
A purely mythological painting in the Renaissance tradition, the Hercules is exceptional among Dürer’s works.
The centre panel from the Dresden Altarpiece, which Dürer painted in about 1498, is stylistically similar to the Hercules and betrays influences of Mantegna.
In most of Dürer’s free adaptations the additional influence of the more lyrical, older painter Giovanni Bellini, with whom Dürer had become acquainted in Venice, can be seen.
The most striking painting illustrating Dürer’s growth toward the Renaissance spirit is a self-portrait, painted in 1498.
Here Dürer sought to convey, in the representation of his own person, the aristocratic ideal of the Renaissance.
He painted himself as a handsome, fashionably attired young man, confronting life rather conceitedly.
In place of the conventional, neutral, monochromatic background, he depicts an interior, with a window opening on the right.
Through the window can be seen a tiny landscape of mountains and a distant sea, a detail that is distinctly reminiscent of contemporary Venetian and Florentine paintings.
The focus on his own figure in the interior distinguishes his world from the vast perspective of the distant scene, another world to which the artist feels himself linked.
Italian influences were slower to take hold in Dürer’s graphics than in his drawings and paintings.
Dürer’s graphics eventually influenced the art of the Italian Renaissance that had originally inspired his own efforts.
His painterly style, however, continued to vacillate between Gothic and Italian Renaissance until about 1500.
Then his restless striving finally found definite direction.
He seems clearly to be on firm ground in the penetrating half-length portraits of Oswolt Krel, in the portraits of three members of the aristocratic Tucher family of Nürnberg - all dated 1499 - and in the Portrait of a Young Man of 1500.
In 1500 Dürer painted another flattering, Christ-like self-portrait.
During this period of consolidation in Dürer’s style, the Italian elements of his art were strengthened by his contact with Jacopo de’ Barbari, a minor Venetian artist who was seeking a geometric solution to the rendering of human proportions.
Perhaps because of his influence Dürer began, about 1500, to grapple with the problem of human proportions in true Renaissance fashion.
In all aspects Dürer’s art was becoming strongly classical.
One of his most significant classical endeavours is his painting Altar of the Three Kings (1504), which was executed with the help of students.
Although the composition, with its five separate pictures, has an Italian character, Dürer’s intellect and imagination went beyond direct dependence on Italian art.
From this maturity of style comes the bold, natural, relaxed conception of the centre panel, The Adoration of the Magi, and the ingenious and unconventional realism of the side panels, one of which depicts the Drummer and Piper and the other Job and His Wife.
<Caption> The Adoration of the Magi, oil painting by Albrecht Dürer, 1504; in the Uffizi, Florence.
SCALA/Art Resource, New York
SECOND JOURNEY TO ITALY
In the autumn of 1505, Dürer made a second journey to Italy, where he remained until the winter of 1507.
Once again he spent most of his time in Venice.
Of the Venetian artists, Dürer now most admired Giovanni Bellini, the leading master of Venetian early Renaissance painting, who, in his later works, completed the transition to the High Renaissance.
Dürer’s pictures of men and women from this Venetian period reflect the sweet, soft portrait types especially favoured by Bellini.
One of Dürer’s most impressive small paintings of this period, a compressed half-length composition of the Young Jesus with the Doctors of 1506, harks back to Bellini’s free adaptation of Mantegna’s Presentation in the Temple.
Dürer’s work is a virtuoso performance that shows mastery and close attention to detail.
In the painting the inscription on the scrap of paper out of the book held by the old man in the foreground reads, “Opus quinque dierum” (“the work of five days”).
Dürer thus must have executed this painstaking display of artistry, which required detailed drawings, in no more than five days.
Of even greater artistic merit than this quickly executed work are the half-length portraits of young men and women painted between 1505 and 1507, which seem to be entirely in the style of Bellini.
In these paintings there is a flexibility of the subject, combined with a warmth and liveliness of expression and a genuinely artistic technique, that Dürer otherwise rarely attained.
In 1506, in Venice, Dürer completed his great altarpiece The Feast of the Rose Garlands for the funeral chapel of the Germans in the church of St. Bartholomew.
Later that same year Dürer made a brief visit to Bologna before returning to Venice for a final three months.
The extent to which Dürer considered Italy to be his artistic and personal home is revealed by the frequently quoted words found in his last letter from Venice (dated October 1506) to an old friend, anticipating his imminent return to Germany: “O, how cold I will be away from the sun; here I am a gentleman, at home a parasite.”
DEVELOPMENT AFTER THE SECOND ITALIAN TRIP
By February 1507 at the latest, Dürer was back in Nürnberg, where two years later he acquired an impressive house (which still stands and is preserved as a museum).
It is clear that the artistic impressions gained from his Italian trips continued to influence Dürer to employ classical principles in creating largely original compositions.
Among the paintings belonging to the period after his second return from Italy are Martyrdom of the Ten Thousand (1508) and Adoration of the Trinity (1511), which are both crowd scenes.
Drawings from this period recall Mantegna and betray Dürer’s striving for classical perfection of form through sweeping lines of firmly modeled and simple drapery.
Even greater simplicity and grandeur characterize the diptych of Adam and Eve (1507), in which the two figures stand calmly in relaxed classical poses against dark, almost bare, backgrounds.
SERVICE TO MAXIMILIAN I
While in Nürnberg in 1512, the Holy Roman emperor Maximilian I enlisted Dürer into his service, and Dürer continued to work mainly for the emperor until 1519.
Besides a number of woodcuts and some formal paintings, Dürer produced during this period a number of more informal paintings of considerably greater charm.
Dürer had achieved an international reputation as an artist by 1515, when he exchanged works with the illustrious High Renaissance painter Raphael.
Dürer also traveled.
In the fall of 1517 he stayed in Bamberg.
In the summer of 1518 he went to Augsburg where he met Martin Luther.
Dürer later became a devoted follower of Luther.
FINAL JOURNEY TO THE NETHERLANDS
In July 1520 Dürer embarked with his wife on a journey through the Netherlands.
In Aachen, Dürer met and presented several etchings to the mystical and dramatic Matthias Grünewald, who stood second only to Dürer in contemporary German art.
Dürer returned to Antwerp by way of Nijmegen and Cologne, remaining there until the summer of 1521.
He had maintained close relations with the leaders of the Netherlandish school of painting.
In December 1520 Dürer visited Zeeland and in April 1521 he traveled to Bruges and Ghent, where he saw the works of Jan and Hubert van Eyck, Rogier van der Weyden, and Hugo van der Goes, as well as the Michelangelo Madonna.
Dürer’s sketchbook of his journey contains immensely detailed and realistic drawings.
Some paintings that were created either during the journey or about the same time seem spiritually akin to those of the Netherlandish school - for example, the portrait of Anna Selbdritt, a half-length picture of St. Jerome (1521), and the small portrait of Bernhard von Resten.
FINAL WORKS
By July the travelers were back in Nürnberg, but Dürer’s health had started to decline.
He devoted his remaining years mostly to theoretical and scientific writings and illustrations, although several well-known character portraits and some important portrait engravings and woodcuts also date from this period.
One of Dürer’s greatest paintings, the so-called Four Apostles (St. John, St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. Mark), was done in 1526.
This work marks his final and certainly highest achievement as a painter.
MATTHIAS GRÜNEWALD (b. 1480, Würzburg, bishopric of Würzburg [Germany] - d.
Aug. 30/31, 1528, Halle, archbishopric of Magdeburg)
Although it is commonly agreed that “Master Mathis” (Mathis Gothardt) was born in the German city of Würzburg, the date of his birth remains problematic.
The first securely dated work by Grünewald (a name fabricated by a biographer in the 17th century), the Mocking of Christ of 1503, seems to be that of a young man just become a master.
Grünewald appears first in documents of about 1500 either in the town of Seligenstadt am Main or Aschaffenburg.
By about 1509 Grünewald had become court painter and later the leading art official (his title was supervisor or clerk of the works) to the elector of Mainz, the archbishop Uriel von Gemmingen.
About 1510 Grünewald received a commission from the Frankfurt merchant Jacob Heller to add two fixed wings to the altarpiece of the Assumption of the Virgin recently completed by the painter Albrecht Dürer.
These wings depicting four saints are painted in grisaille (a technique using a single colour - especially gray - and so modeled to produce a three-dimensional effect) and already show the artist at the height of his powers.
Like Grünewald’s drawings, which are done primarily in black chalk with some yellow or white highlighting, the Heller wings convey colouristic effects without the use of colour.
Expressive hands and active draperies help blur the boundaries between cold stone and living form.
About 1515 Grünewald was entrusted with the largest and most important commission of his career.
Guido Guersi, an Italian preceptor, or knight, who led the religious community of the Antonite monastery at Isenheim (in southern Alsace), asked the artist to paint a series of wings for the shrine of the high altar that had been carved in about 1505 by Niclaus Hagnower of Strasbourg.
The subject matter of the wings of the Isenheim Altarpiece provided Grünewald’s genius with its fullest expression and was based largely on the text of the popular, mystical Revelations of St. Bridget of Sweden (written about 1370).
The Isenheim Altarpiece consists of a carved wooden shrine with one pair of fixed and two pairs of movable wings flanking it.
Grünewald’s paintings on these large wing panels consist of the following.
The first set of panels depicts the Crucifixion, the Lamentation, and portraits of SS.
Sebastian and Anthony.
The second set focuses on the Virgin Mary, with scenes of the Annunciation and a Concert of Angels, a Nativity, and the Resurrection.
The third set of wings focuses on St. Anthony, with St. Anthony and St. Paul in the Desert and the Temptation of St. Anthony.
The altarpiece’s figures are given uniquely determined gestures, their limbs are distended for expressive effect, and their draperies (a trademark of Grünewald’s that expand and contract in accordion pleats) mirror the passions of the soul.
The colours used are simultaneously biting and brooding.
The Isenheim Altarpiece expresses deep spiritual mysteries.
The Concert of Angels, for instance, depicts an exotic angel choir housed within an elaborate baldachin (a canopy over an altar).
At one opening of the baldachin a small, glowing female form, the eternal and immaculate Virgin, kneels in adoration of her own earthly manifestation at the right.
And at the far left of the same scene under the baldachin, a feathered creature, probably the evil archangel Lucifer, adds his demonic notes to the serenade.
Other details in the altarpiece, including the horribly wounded body of Christ in the Crucifixion, may refer to the role of the monastery as a hospital for victims of the plague and St. Anthony’s fire.
The colour red takes on unusual power and poignancy in the altarpiece, first in the Crucifixion, then in the Annunciation and Nativity, and finally on Christ’s shroud in the Resurrection, which is at first lifeless in the cold tomb but which then smolders and bursts into white-hot flame as Christ ascends, displaying his tiny purified red wounds.
Such transformations of light and colour are perhaps the most spectacular found in German art until the late 19th century.
And through all this drama, Grünewald never misses the telling picturesque detail: a botanical specimen, a string of prayer beads, or a crystal carafe.
Another important clerical commission came from a canon in Aschaffenburg, Heinrich Reitzmann.
As early as 1513 he had asked Grünewald to paint an altar for the Mariaschnee Chapel in the Church of Saints Peter and Alexander in Aschaffenburg.
The artist painted this work in the years 1517–19.
Grünewald apparently married about 1519, but the marriage does not appear to have brought him much happiness (at least, that is the tradition recorded in the 17th century).
Grünewald occasionally added his wife’s surname, Neithardt, to his own, thereby accounting for several documentary references to him as Mathis Neithardt or Mathis Gothardt Neithardt.
For Albrecht von Brandenburg, elector of Mainz, Grünewald executed one of his most luxurious works, portraying The Meeting of SS.
Erasmus and Maurice (Erasmus is actually a portrait of Albrecht).
This work exhibits the theme of religious discussion or debate, so important to this period of German art and history.
In this painting, as well as in the late, two-sided panel known as the Tauberbischofsheim Altarpiece, Grünewald’s forms become more massive and compact, his colours restrained but still vivid.
Apparently because of his sympathy with the Peasants’ Revolt of 1525, Grünewald left Albrecht’s service in 1526.
He spent the last two years of his life visiting in Frankfurt and Halle, cities sympathetic to the newly emerging Protestant cause.
Grünewald’s painterly achievement remains one of the most striking in the history of northern European art.
Ten or so paintings (some of which are composed of several panels) and approximately 35 drawings have survived into the 21st century.
His dramatic and intensely expressive approach to subject matter can perhaps best be observed in his three other extant paintings of the Crucifixion, which echo the Isenheim Altarpiece in their depiction of the scarified and agonized body of Christ.
HANS HOLBEIN THE YOUNGER (b. 1497/98, Augsburg, Bishopric of Augsburg [Germany] - d.
1543, London, Eng.)
Hans Holbein was a member of a family of important artists.
His father, Hans Holbein the Elder, and his uncle Sigmund were renowned for their somewhat conservative examples of late Gothic painting in Germany.
One of Holbein’s brothers, Ambrosius, became a painter as well, but he apparently died about 1519 before reaching maturity as an artist.
The Holbein brothers no doubt first studied with their father in Augsburg.
They both also began independent work about 1515 in Basel, Switzerland.
It should be noted that this chronology places Holbein firmly in the second generation of 16th-century German artists.
Albrecht Dürer and Matthias Grünewald were born between 1470 and 1480 and were producing their mature masterpieces by the time Holbein was just beginning his career.
Holbein is, in fact, the only truly outstanding German artist of his generation.
<Caption> Portrait of Desiderius Erasmus by Hans Holbein the Younger.
Photos.com/Thinkstock
Holbein’s work in Basel during the decade of 1515–25 was extremely varied, if also sometimes derivative.
Trips to northern Italy (c. 1517) and France (1524) certainly affected the development of his religious subjects and portraiture, respectively.
Holbein entered the painters’ corporation in 1519, married a tanner’s widow, and became a burgher of Basel in 1520.
By 1521 he was executing important mural decorations in the Great Council Chamber of Basel’s town hall.
Holbein was associated early on with the Basel publishers and their humanist circle of acquaintances.
There he found portrait commissions such as that of the humanist scholar Bonifacius Amerbach (1519).
In this and other early portraits, Holbein showed himself to be a master of the current German portrait idiom, using robust characterization and accessories, strong gaze, and dramatic silhouette.
In Basel, Holbein was also active in designing woodcuts for title pages and book illustrations.
His first major portrait of Desiderius Erasmus (1523) portrays the Dutch humanist scholar as physically withdrawn from the world, sitting at his desk engaged in his voluminous European correspondence.
His hands are as sensitively rendered as his carefully controlled profile.
Protestantism, which had been introduced into Basel as early as 1522, grew considerably in strength and importance there during the ensuing four years.
By 1526 severe iconoclastic riots and strict censorship of the press swept over the city.
In the face of what, for the moment at least, amounted to a freezing of the arts, Holbein left Basel late in 1526, with a letter of introduction from Erasmus, to travel by way of the Netherlands to England.
Though only about 28 years old, he would achieve remarkable success in England.
His most impressive works of this time were executed for the statesman and author Sir Thomas More and included a magnificent single portrait of the humanist (1527).
In this image, the painter’s close observation extends to the tiny stubble of More’s beard, the iridescent glow of his velvet sleeves, and the abstract decorative effects of the gold chain that he wears.
Before Holbein journeyed to England in 1526, he had apparently designed works that were both proand anti-Lutheran in character.
On returning to Basel in 1528, he was admitted, after some hesitation, to the new - and now official - faith.
It would be difficult to interpret this as a very decisive change, for Holbein’s most impressive religious works, like his portraits, are brilliant observations of physical reality but seem never to have been inspired by Christian spirituality.
This is evident in both the claustrophobic, rotting body of the Dead Christ in the Tomb (1521) and in the beautifully composed Family of Burgomaster Meyer Adoring the Virgin (1526).
In this latter painting, Holbein skillfully combined a late medieval German compositional format with precise Flemish realism and a monumental Italian treatment of form.
Holbein apparently voluntarily gave up almost all religious painting after about 1530.
In Basel from 1528 to 1532, Holbein continued his important work for the town council.
He also painted what is perhaps his only psychologically penetrating portrait, that of his wife and two sons (c. 1528).
This picture no doubt conveys some of the unhappiness of that abandoned family.
In spite of generous offers from Basel, Holbein left his wife and children in that city for a second time, to spend the last 11 years of his life primarily in England.
By 1533 Holbein was already painting court personalities, and four years later he officially entered the service of King Henry VIII of England.
He died in a London plague epidemic in 1543.
It is estimated that during the last 10 years of his life Holbein executed approximately 150 portraits, life-size and miniature, of royalty and nobility alike.
These portraits ranged from a magnificent series depicting German merchants who were working in London to a double portrait of the French ambassadors to Henry VIII’s court (1533) to portraits of the king himself (1536) and his wives Jane Seymour (1536) and Anne of Cleves (1539).
In these and other examples, the artist revealed his fascination with plant, animal, and decorative accessories.
Holbein’s preliminary drawings of his sitters contain detailed notations concerning jewelry and other costume decorations as well.
Sometimes such objects point to specific events or concerns in the sitter’s life, or they act as attributes referring to a sitter’s occupation or character.
The relation between accessories and face is a charged and stimulating one that avoids simple correspondence.
<Caption> Anne of Cleves, portrait by Hans Holbein the Younger, 1539; in the Louvre Museum, Paris.
© Giraudon/Art Resource, New York
In an analogous fashion, Holbein’s mature portraits present an intriguing play between surface and depth.
The sitter’s outlines and position within the frame are carefully calculated, while inscriptions applied on the surface in gold leaf lock the sitter’s head into place.
Juxtaposed with this finely tuned two-dimensional design are illusionistic miracles of velvet, fur, feathers, needlework, and leather.
Holbein acted not only as a portraitist but also as a fashion designer for the court.
The artist made designs for all the state robes of the king.
He left, in addition, more than 250 delicate drawings for everything from buttons and buckles to pageant weapons, horse outfittings, and bookbindings for the royal household.
PIETER BRUEGEL THE ELDER (b. c. 1525, probably Breda, duchy of Brabant [now in the Netherlands] - d.
Sept. 5/9, 1569, Brussels [now in Belgium])
There is but little information about events in the life of Pieter Bruegel, the Elder.
According to Carel van Mander’s Het Schilderboeck (Book of Painters), published in Amsterdam in 1604 (35 years after Bruegel’s death), Bruegel was apprenticed to Pieter Coecke van Aelst, a leading Antwerp artist working in Brussels.
The head of a large workshop, Coecke was a sculptor, architect, and designer of tapestry and stained glass who had traveled in Italy and in Turkey.
Although Bruegel’s earliest surviving works show no stylistic dependence on Coecke’s Italianate art, connections with Coecke’s compositions can be detected in later years, particularly after 1563, when Bruegel married Coecke’s daughter Mayken.
In any case, the apprenticeship with Coecke represented an early contact with a humanistic milieu.
Through Coecke, Bruegel became linked indirectly to another tradition as well.
Coecke’s wife, Maria Verhulst Bessemers, was a painter known for her work in watercolour or tempera, a suspension of pigments in egg yolk or a glutinous substance, on linen.
The technique was widely practiced in her hometown of Mechelen (Malines) and was later employed by Bruegel.
It is also in the works of Mechelen’s artists that allegorical and peasant thematic material first appear.
These subjects, unusual in Antwerp, were later treated by Bruegel.
In 1551 or 1552 Bruegel set off on the customary northern artist’s journey to Italy, probably by way of France.
From several extant paintings, drawings, and etchings, it can be deduced that he traveled beyond Naples to Sicily, possibly as far as Palermo, and that in 1553 he lived for some time in Rome, where he worked with a celebrated miniaturist, Giulio Clovio, an artist greatly influenced by Michelangelo and later a patron of the young El Greco.
The inventory of Clovio’s estate shows that he owned a number of paintings and drawings by Bruegel as well as a miniature done by the two artists in collaboration.
It was in Rome in 1553 that Bruegel produced his earliest signed and dated painting, Landscape with Christ and the Apostles at the Sea of Tiberias.
The holy figures in this painting were probably done by Maarten de Vos, a painter from Antwerp then working in Italy.
The earliest surviving works, including two drawings with Italian scenery sketched on the southward journey and dated 1552, are landscapes.
A number of drawings of Alpine regions, produced between 1553 and 1556, indicate the great impact of the mountain experience on this man from the Low Countries.
The landscapes resulting from this journey are almost without parallel in European art for their rendering of the overpowering grandeur of the high mountains.
Very few of the drawings were done on the spot, and several were done after Bruegel’s return, at an unknown date, to Antwerp.
The vast majority are free compositions, combinations of motifs sketched on the journey through the Alps.
Some were intended as designs for engravings.
From 1556 on he concentrated, surprisingly enough, on satirical, didactic, and moralizing subjects, often in the fantastic or grotesque manner of Hiëronymus Bosch, imitations of whose works were very popular at the time.
Other artists were content with a more or less close imitation of Bosch, but Bruegel’s inventiveness lifted his designs above mere imitation, and he soon found ways to express his ideas in a much different manner.
But the new subject matter and the interest in the human figure did not lead to the abandonment of landscape.
Bruegel in fact extended his explorations in this field.
Side by side with his mountain compositions, he began to draw the woods of the countryside.
He turned then to Flemish villages and, in 1562, to townscapes with the towers and gates of Amsterdam.
The double interest in landscape and in the human figure also informed, often jointly, the paintings that Bruegel produced in increasing numbers after his return from Italy.
All of his paintings, even those in which the landscape appears as the dominant feature, have some narrative content.
Conversely, in those that are primarily narrative, the landscape setting often carries part of the meaning.
Dated paintings have survived from each year of the period except 1558 and 1561.
Within this decade falls Bruegel’s marriage to Mayken Coecke in the Church of Notre-Dame de la Chapelle in Brussels in 1563 and his move to that city, in which Mayken and her mother were living.
His house in Brussels was restored in the 20th century.
During this period in Brussels, Bruegel produced his greatest paintings.
Among his patrons was Antione Perrenot Cardinal de Granvelle, president of the council of state in the Netherlands, in whose palace in Brussels the sculptor Jacques Jonghelinck had a studio.
He and Bruegel had traveled in Italy at the same time, and his brother, a rich Antwerp collector, Niclaes, was Bruegel’s greatest patron, having by 1566 acquired 16 of his paintings.
Another patron was Abraham Ortelius, who in a memorable obituary called Bruegel the most perfect artist of the century.
Most of his paintings were done for collectors.
In addition to a great many drawings and engravings by Bruegel, 45 authenticated paintings from a much larger output now lost have been preserved.
Of this number, about a third are concentrated in the Vienna Kunsthistorisches Museum.
In his earliest surviving works, Bruegel appears as essentially a landscape artist, indebted to, but transcending, the Flemish 16th-century landscape tradition, as well as to Titian and to other Venetian landscape painters.
After his return from Italy, he turned to multifigure compositions, representations of crowds of people loosely disposed throughout the picture and usually seen from above.
Here, too, antecedents can be found in the art of Hiëronymus Bosch and of other painters closer in time to Bruegel.
In 1564 and 1565, under the spell of Italian art and especially of Raphael, Bruegel reduced the number of figures drastically, the few being larger and placed closely together in a very narrow space.
In 1565, however, he turned again to landscape with the celebrated series known as Labours of the Months.
In the five of the series’ presumed six paintings that have survived (The Harvesters, The Gloomy Day, Hunters in the Snow, Haymaking, and The Return of the Herd), he subordinated the figures to the great lines of the landscape.
Later on, crowds appear again, disposed in densely concentrated groups.
Bruegel’s last works often show a striking affinity with Italian art.
The diagonal spatial arrangement of the figures in Peasant Wedding recalls Venetian compositions.
Though transformed into peasants, the figures in such works as Peasant and Bird Nester (1568) have something of the grandeur of Michelangelo.
In the very last works, two trends appear: on the one hand, a combined monumentalization and extreme simplification of figures and, on the other hand, an exploration of the expressive quality of the various moods conveyed by landscape.
The former trend is evident in his Hunters in the Snow (1565).
The latter is seen in the radiant, sunny atmosphere of The Magpie on the Gallows and in the threatening and sombre character of The Storm at Sea, an unfinished work, probably Bruegel’s last painting.
<Caption> The Tower of Babel, oil painting by Pieter Bruegel the Elder, 1563; in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna.
Courtesy of the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna
Bruegel was no less interested in observing human creations.
Noting every detail with almost scientific exactness, he rendered ships with great accuracy in several paintings.
A most faithful picture of contemporary building operations is shown in the two paintings of The Tower of Babel (one 1563, the other undated).
The Rotterdam Tower of Babel illustrates yet another characteristic of Bruegel’s art, an obsessive interest in rendering movement.
It was a challenge with which he constantly experimented.
In the Rotterdam painting, movement is imparted to an inanimate object, the tower seeming to be shown in rotation.
Even more strikingly, in The Magpie on the Gallows, the gallows apparently take part in the peasants’ dance shown next to them.
The several paintings of peasant dances are obvious examples, and others, less obvious, are the processional representations in The Way to Calvary and in The Conversion of St. Paul.
The latter work also conveys the sensation of the movement of figures through the constantly changing terrain of mountainous regions.
This sensation had appeared first in the early mountain drawings and later, in different form, in The Flight into Egypt (1563).
Toward the end of his life, Bruegel seems to have become fascinated by the problem of the falling figure.
His studies reached their apogee in a rendering of successive stages of falling in The Parable of the Blind.
The perfect unity of form, content, and expression marks this painting as a high point in European art.
The subject matter of Bruegel’s compositions covers an impressively wide range.
In addition to the landscapes, his repertoire consists of conventional biblical scenes and parables of Christ, mythological subjects as in Landscape with the Fall of Icarus (two versions), and the illustrations of proverbial sayings in The Netherlands Proverbs and several other paintings.
His allegorical compositions are often of a religious character, as the two engraved series of The Vices (1556–57) and The Virtues (1559–60), but they included profane social satires as well.
The scenes from peasant life are well known, but a number of subjects that are not easy to classify include The Fight Between Carnival and Lent (1559), Children’s Games (1560), and Dulle Griet, also known as Mad Meg (1562).
EL GRECO (b. 1541, Candia [Iráklion], Crete - d.
April 7, 1614, Toledo, Spain)
El Greco never forgot that he was of Greek descent and usually signed his paintings in Greek letters with his full name, Doménikos Theotokópoulos.
He is, nevertheless, generally known as El Greco (“the Greek”), a name he acquired when he lived in Italy, where the custom of identifying someone by country or city of origin was a common practice.
The curious form of the article (El), however, may be the Venetian dialect or more likely from the Spanish.
EARLY LIFE AND WORKS
Because Crete, his homeland, was then a Venetian possession and he was a Venetian citizen, he determined to go to Venice to study.
The exact year in which this took place is not known; but speculation has placed the date anywhere from 1560, when he was 19, to 1566.
In Venice he entered the studio of Titian, who was the greatest painter of the day.
Knowledge of El Greco’s years in Italy is limited.
A letter of Nov. 16, 1570, written by Giulio Clovio, an illuminator in the service of Cardinal Alessandro Farnese, requested lodging in the Palazzo Farnese for “a young man from Candia, a pupil of Titian.”
On July 8, 1572, “the Greek painter” is mentioned in a letter sent from Rome by a Farnese official to the same cardinal.
Shortly thereafter, on Sept. 18, 1572, “Dominico Greco” paid his dues to the guild of St. Luke in Rome.
How long the young artist remained in Rome is unknown, because he may have returned to Venice, about 1575–76, before he left for Spain.
The certain works painted by El Greco in Italy are completely in the Venetian Renaissance style of the 16th century.
They show no effect of his Byzantine heritage except possibly in the faces of old men - for example, in the Christ Healing the Blind.
The placing of figures in deep space and the emphasis on an architectural setting in High Renaissance style are particularly significant in his early pictures, such as Christ Cleansing the Temple.
The first evidence of El Greco’s extraordinary gifts as a portraitist appears in Italy in a portrait of Giulio Clovio and Vincentio Anastagi.
MIDDLE YEARS
El Greco first appeared in Spain in the spring of 1577, initially at Madrid, later in Toledo.
One of his main reasons for seeking a new career in Spain must have been knowledge of Philip II’s great project, the building of the monastery of San Lorenzo at El Escorial, some 26 miles (42 km) northwest of Madrid.
Moreover, the Greek must have met important Spanish churchmen in Rome through Fulvio Orsini, a humanist and librarian of the Palazzo Farnese.
It is known that at least one Spanish ecclesiastic who spent some time in Rome at this period - Luis de Castilla - became El Greco’s intimate friend and was eventually named one of the two executors of his last testament.
Luis’ brother, Diego de Castilla, gave El Greco his first commission in Spain, which possibly had been promised before the artist left Italy.
In 1578 Jorge Manuel, the painter’s only son, was born at Toledo, the offspring of Doña Jerónima de Las Cuevas.
She appears to have outlived El Greco, and, although he acknowledged both her and his son, he did not marry her.
That fact has puzzled all writers, because he mentioned her in various documents, including his last testament.
It may be that El Greco had married unhappily in his youth in Crete or Italy and therefore could not legalize another attachment.
For the rest of his life El Greco continued to live in Toledo, busily engaged on commissions for the churches and monasteries there and in the province.
He became a close friend of the leading humanists, scholars, and churchmen.
The inventories compiled after his death confirm the fact that he was a man of extraordinary culture - a true Renaissance humanist.
His library, which gives some idea of the breadth and range of his interests, included works of the major Greek authors in Greek, numerous books in Latin, and others in Italian and in Spanish: Plutarch’s Lives, Petrarch’s poetry, Ludovico Ariosto’s Orlando furioso, the Bible in Greek, the proceedings of the Council of Trent, and architectural treatises by Marcus Vitruvius Pollio, Giacomo da Vignola, Leon Battista Alberti, Andrea Palladio, and Sebastiano Serlio.
El Greco’s first commission in Spain was for the high altar and the two lateral altars in the conventual church of Santo Domingo el Antiguo at Toledo (1577–79).
Never before had the artist had a commission of such importance and scope.
Even the architectural design of the altar frames, reminiscent of the style of the Venetian architect Palladio, was prepared by El Greco.
The painting for the high altar, Assumption of the Virgin, also marked a new period in the artist’s life, revealing the full extent of his genius.
The figures are brought close into the foreground, and in the Apostles a new brilliance of colour is achieved.
The technique remains Venetian in the laying on of the paint and in the liberal use of white highlights; yet the intensity of the colours and the manipulation of contrasts, verging on dissonance, is distinctly El Greco.
For the first time, the importance of his assimilation of the art of Michelangelo comes to the fore, particularly in the painting of the Trinity, in the upper part of the high altar, where the powerful sculpturesque body of the nude Christ leaves no doubt of the ultimate source of inspiration.
In the lateral altar painting of the Resurrection, the poses of the standing soldiers and the contrapposto (a position in which the upper and lower parts of the body are contrasted in direction) of those asleep are also clearly Michelangelesque in inspiration.
At the same time, El Greco created another masterpiece of extraordinary originality - the Espolio (Disrobing of Christ).
In designing the composition vertically and compactly in the foreground he seems to have been motivated by the desire to show the oppression of Christ by his cruel tormentors.
He chose a method of space elimination that is common to middle and late 16th-century Italian Mannerist painters, and at the same time he probably recalled late Byzantine paintings in which the superposition of heads row upon row is employed to suggest a crowd.
The original altar of gilded wood that El Greco designed for the painting has been destroyed, but his small sculptured group of the Miracle of St. Ildefonso still survives on the lower centre of the frame.
El Greco’s tendency to elongate the human figure becomes more notable at this time - for example, in the handsome and unrestored St. Sebastian.
The same extreme elongation of body is also present in Michelangelo’s work, in the painting of the Venetians Tintoretto and Paolo Veronese, and in the art of the leading Mannerist painters.
The increased slenderness of Christ’s long body against the dramatic clouds in Crucifixion with Donors foreshadows the artist’s late style.
El Greco’s connection with the court of Philip II was brief and unsuccessful, consisting first of the Allegory of the Holy League (Dream of Philip II; 1578–79) and second of the Martyrdom of St. Maurice (1580–82).
The latter painting did not meet with the approval of the king, who promptly ordered another work of the same subject to replace it.
Thus ended the great artist’s connection with the Spanish court.
The king may have been troubled by the almost shocking brilliance of the yellows as contrasted to the ultramarine in the costumes of the main group of the painting, which includes St. Maurice in the centre.
On the other hand, to the modern eye El Greco’s daring use of colour is particularly appealing.
The brushwork remains Venetian in the way that the colour suggests form and in the free illusionistic and atmospheric creation of space.
The Burial of the Count de Orgaz (1586–88) is universally regarded as El Greco’s masterpiece.
The supernatural vision of Gloria (“Heaven”) above and the impressive array of portraits represent aspects of this extraordinary genius’s art.
El Greco clearly distinguished between heaven and earth: above, heaven is evoked by swirling icy clouds, semiabstract in their shape, and the saints are tall and phantomlike; below, all is normal in the scale and proportions of the figures.
According to the legend, Saints Augustine and Stephen appeared miraculously to lay the Count de Orgaz in his tomb as a reward for his generosity to their church.
In golden and red vestments they bend reverently over the body of the count, who is clad in magnificent armour that reflects the yellow and reds of the other figures.
The young boy at the left is El Greco’s son, Jorge Manuel; on a handkerchief in his pocket is inscribed the artist’s signature and the date 1578, the year of the boy’s birth.
The men in contemporary 16th-century dress who attend the funeral are unmistakably prominent members of Toledan society.
El Greco’s Mannerist method of composition is nowhere more clearly expressed than here, where all of the action takes place in the frontal plane.
<Caption> The Burial of the Count de Orgaz, considered by many to be El Greco’s crowning achievement as a painter.
SuperStock/Getty Images
LATER LIFE AND WORKS
From 1590 until his death El Greco’s painterly output was prodigious.
His pictures for the churches and convents of the Toledan region include the Holy Family with the Magdalen and the Holy Family with St. Anne.
He repeated several times the Agony in the Garden, in which a supernatural world is evoked through strange shapes and brilliant, cold, clashing colours.
The devotional theme of Christ Carrying the Cross is known in 11 originals by El Greco and many copies.
El Greco depicted most of the major saints, often repeating the same composition: St. Dominic, Mary Magdalen, St. Jerome as cardinal, St. Jerome in penitence, and St. Peter in tears.
St. Francis of Assisi, however, was by far the saint most favoured by the artist; about 25 originals representing St. Francis survive and, in addition, more than 100 pieces by followers.
The most popular of several types was St. Francis and Brother Leo Meditating on Death.
He painted two major series (Apostolados), one of which can be seen in the El Greco Museum in Toledo, Spain.
The frontal pose of the Christ blessing in this series suggests a medieval Byzantine figure, although the colour and brushwork are El Greco’s personal handling of Venetian technique.
In these works the devotional intensity of mood reflects the religious spirit of Roman Catholic Spain in the period of the Counter-Reformation.
Although Greek by descent and Italian by artistic preparation, the artist became so immersed in the religious environment of Spain that he became the most vital visual representative of Spanish mysticism.
Yet, because of the combination of these three cultures, he developed into an artist so individual that he belongs to no conventional school but is a lonely genius of unprecedented emotional power and imagination.
Several major commissions came El Greco’s way in the last 15 years of his life: three altars for the Chapel of San José, Toledo (1597–99); three paintings (1596–1600) for the Colegio de Doña María de Aragon, an Augustinian monastery in Madrid; and the high altar, four lateral altars, and the painting St. Ildefonso for the Hospital de la Caridad at Illescas (1603–05).
Extreme distortion of body characterizes El Greco’s last works - for example, the Adoration of the Shepherds, painted in 1612–14 for his own burial chapel.
The brilliant, dissonant colours and the strange shapes and poses create a sense of wonder and ecstasy, as the shepherd and angels celebrate the miracle of the newly born child.
In the unfinished Vision of St. John, El Greco’s imagination led him to disregard the laws of nature even more.
The gigantic swaying figure of St. John the Evangelist, in abstractly painted icy-blue garments, reveals the souls of the martyrs who cry out for deliverance.
In like manner, the figure of the Madonna in the Immaculate Conception (1607–14), originally in the Church of San Vicente, floats heavenward in a paroxysm of ecstasy supported by long, distorted angels.
The fantastic view of Toledo below, abstractly rendered, is dazzling in its ghostly moonlit brilliance, and the clusters of roses and lilies, symbols of the Virgin’s purity, are unalloyed in their sheer beauty.
In his three surviving landscapes, El Greco demonstrated his characteristic tendency to dramatize rather than to describe.
The View of Toledo (c. 1595) renders a city stormy, sinister, and impassioned with the same dark, foreboding clouds that appear in the background of his earlier Crucifixion with Donors.
Painting in his studio, he rearranged the buildings depicted in the picture to suit his compositional purpose.
View and Plan of Toledo (1610–14) is almost like a vision, all of the buildings painted glistening white.
An inscription by the artist on the canvas explains quite fancifully that he had placed the Hospital of San Juan Bautista on a cloud in the foreground so that it could better be seen and that the map in the picture shows the streets of the city.
At the left, a river god represents the Tagus, which flows around Toledo, a city built on rocky heights.
Although El Greco had lived in Italy and in Rome itself, he rarely used such classical Roman motives.
The one picture by El Greco that has a mythological subject, so dear to most Renaissance artists, is the Laocoön (1610–14).
For ancient Troy he substituted a view of Toledo, similar to the one just discussed, and he displayed little regard for classical tradition in painting the highly expressive but great, sprawling body of the priest.
Although El Greco was primarily a painter of religious subjects, his portraits, though less numerous, are equally high in quality.
Two of his finest late works are the portraits of Fray Felix Hortensio Paravicino (1609) and Cardinal Don Fernando Niño de Guevara (c. 1600).
Both are seated, as was customary after the time of Raphael in portraits presenting important ecclesiastics.
Paravicino, a Trinitarian monk and a famous orator and poet, is depicted as a sensitive, intelligent man.
The pose is essentially frontal, and the white habit and black cloak provide highly effective pictorial contrasts.
Cardinal Niño de Guevara, in crimson robes, is almost electrical in his inherent energy, a man accustomed to command.
El Greco’s portrait of Jeronimo de Cevallos (1605–10), on the other hand, is most sympathetic.
The work is half-length, painted thinly and limited to black and white.
The huge ruff collar, then in fashion, enframes the kindly face.
By such simple means, the artist created a memorable characterization that places him in the highest rank as a portraitist, along with Titian and Rembrandt.
No followers of any consequence remained in Toledo after El Greco’s death in 1614.
Only his son and a few unknown painters produced weak copies of the master’s work.
His art was so personally and so highly individual that it could not survive his passing.
Moreover, the new Baroque style of Caravaggio and of the Carracci soon supplanted the last surviving traits of 16th-century Mannerism.
El Greco, whose biography is the last presented in this book, is somewhat of an outlier - belonging to the tradition of Italian Renaissance painting but operating chiefly in Spain.
Yet he is the perfect subject on which to end a volume on Renaissance painters, for in the Mannerist style he embraced in his later life can be found perhaps the highest expression of Late Renaissance ideals.
Few periods of art history have been as heady and exhilarating as the Renaissance.
During the centuries encompassed by that period, artists turned away from the strictly religious, hieratic, and static and toward individualized figures (not-always-religious subjects) and a sense of the volumetric (tied to the use of perspective and shading).
This changing approach to painting coincided with social and economic changes such as the secularizationof daily life, the rise of a rational money-credit economy, and greatly increased social mobility to produce one of the richest tapestries of expression in human history.