A gentle breeze blew through Monica's hair.
The golden red sun was setting.
She was on the beach, looking up at the fiery ball.
She was amazed by its color, deep red in the middle, softly fading into yellow.
She could hear nothing but the waves and the seagulls flying up above in the sky.
The atmosphere relaxed her.
After all she had been through, this is what she needed. "
It's getting late," she thought, "I must go home, my parents will be wondering where I am. "
She wondered how her parents would react, when she got home after the three days she was missing.
She kept on walking, directing herself to bungalow 163, where she spent every summer holiday.
The road was deserted.
She walked slowly and silently.
Just in a few hundred meters she would have been safe in her house.
It was really getting dark now, the sun had set a few minutes before and it was getting cold too.
She wished she had her favorite jumper on: it kept her really warm.
She imagined having it with her.
This thought dissipated when she finally saw her front door.
It seemed different.
Nobody had taken care of the outside garden for a few days.
She was shocked: her father was usually so strict about keeping everything clean and tidy, and now… It all seemed deserted.
She couldn't understand what was going on.
She entered the house.
First, she went into the kitchen where she saw a note written by her father.
It said: "Dear Helen, there is some coffee ready, I went looking."
Helen was her mother but - where was she?
On the right side of the hallway was her parents' room.
She went in.
Then she saw her.
Her mother, lying on the bed, sleeping.
Her face looked so tired, as if she hadn't slept for days.
She was really pale.
Monica would have wanted to wake her up but she looked too tired to force her.
So Monica just fell asleep beside her.
When Monica woke up something was different… she wasn't in her mother's room and she wasn't wearing the old clothes she ran away in.
She was in her cozy bed in her pajamas.
It felt so good being back home.
Suddenly she heard a voice. "
Are you feeling better now, dear?
You know you got us very, very scared. "
There was a young flower in the desert where all was dry and sad-looking.
It was growing by itself, enjoying every day and saying to the sun, "When shall I be grown up? "
And the sun would say, "Be patient - each time I touch you, you grow a little. "
She was so pleased.
Because she would have a chance to bring beauty to this corner of sand.
And this is all she wanted to do - bring a little bit of beauty to this world.
One day a hunter came by and stepped on her.
She was going to die and she felt so sad.
Not because she was dying, but because she would not have a chance to bring a little bit of beauty to this corner of the desert.
The Great Spirit saw her, and was listening.
Indeed he said, "She should be living. "
And he reached down and touched her and gave her life.
And she grew up to be a beautiful flower and this corner of the desert became so beautiful because of her.
The thing that goes the farthest
Toward making life worthwhile,
That costs the least and does the most,
Is just a pleasant smile.
The smile that bubbles from the heart
That loves its fellow men,
Will drive away the clouds of gloom
And coax the sun again.
It's full of worth and goodness, too,
With manly kindness blent;
It's worth a million dollars,
And it doesn't cost a cent.
There is no room for sadness
When we see a cheery smile;
It always has the same good look;
It's never out of style;
It nerves us on to try again
When failure makes us blue;
The dimples of encouragement
Are good for me and you.
It pays the highest interest -
For it is merely lent;
It's worth a million dollars,
And it doesn't cost a cent.
A smile comes very easy -
You can wrinkle up with cheer,
A hundred times before
You can squeeze out a salty tear;
It ripples out, moreover,
To the heartstrings that will tug,
And always leaves an echo
That is very like a hug.
So, smile away!
Folks understand
What by a smile is meant;
It's worth a million dollars,
And it doesn't cost a cent.
In a cold winter, a couple had to move out from the luxury villa because of bankruptcy.
The husband worked day and night to support the family but with no care of his wife.
So she thought, "He doesn't love me any more; he cares about his business, not me. "
One day, she began to take a bath; he stopped her at the door, "Let me take it first, okay?" "
Why not let me shower first? "
she asked.
" I was tired, sweetie, you take it later, okay? "
She was totally depressed.
On a morose day, she found nothing to do and turned on his computer, a few words blurred her eyes … It was his diary:
Today, I was quite sad, she asked me why I was always taking the bath first, and I said to her, I was exhausted.
She was unhappy, in her mind, I treated her not as well as usual, but how can I do?
I was not as rich as before!
We moved to this small apartment, there was only a shower in the bathroom, it was so cold to take a shower in such a freezing winter.
But I found that if one person took the shower first, the room could get a little warmer, so every time I rushed to the bathroom first.
I was thinking that, when she took the shower, the room would get warmer, at least 1℃, 2℃ or 3℃.
Now, I can't give her a comfortable life, bring her to the luxury restaurant, buy expensive dresses for her, but at least, I can give her 1℃ love.
Two men, both seriously ill, occupied the same hospital room.
One man was allowed to sit up in his bed for an hour each afternoon to help drain the fluid from his lungs.
His bed was next to the room's only window.
The other man had to spend all his time flat on his back.
The men talked for hours on end.
They spoke of their wives and families, their homes, their jobs, their involvement in the military service, where they had been on vacation.
And every afternoon when the man in the bed by the window could sit up, he would pass the time by describing to his roommate all the things he could see outside the window.
The man in the other bed began to live for those one-hour periods where his world would be broadened and enlivened by all the activity and color of the world outside.
The window overlooked a park with a lovely lake.
Ducks and swans played on the water while children sailed their model boats.
Young lovers walked arm in arm amidst flowers of every color of the rainbow.
Grand old trees graced the landscape, and a fine view of the city skyline could be seen in the distance.
As the man by the window described all this in exquisite detail, the man on the other side of the room would close his eyes and imagine the picturesque scene.
One warm afternoon the man by the window described a parade passing by.
Although the other man couldn't hear the band, he could see it in his mind's eye as the gentleman by the window portrayed it with descriptive words.
Days and weeks passed.
One morning, the day nurse arrived to bring water for their baths only to find the lifeless body of the man by the window, who had died peacefully in his sleep.
She was saddened and called the hospital attendants to take the body away.
As soon as it seemed appropriate, the other man asked if he could be moved next to the window.
The nurse was happy to make the switch, and after making sure he was comfortable, she left him alone.
Slowly, painfully, he propped himself up on one elbow to take his first look at the world outside.
Finally, he would have the joy of seeing it for himself.
He strained to slowly turn to look out of the window beside the bed.
It faced a blank wall.
The man asked the nurse what could have compelled his deceased roommate who had described such wonderful things outside this window.
The nurse responded that the man was blind and could not even see the wall.
Spontaneity has never been my forte.
As a 14-year-old, I would refuse to go for walks around the block with my friends if I was the least bit behind in my schoolwork. "
You're just no fun," my friend Jane would tell me.
Unlike most teenagers, I lived not in my room, but in an unused kitchen upstairs where I sprawled my books and papers on a large round table.
I spent an inordinate amount of time there, working continuously for hours, and my mother worried.
She would try to lure me away. "
Come watch the parade! "
she would yell from downstairs. "
All our neighbors are out there!"
She thought of all kinds of enticements - the swimming pool, ice cream, stray cats and turtles - to dislodge me from my studies, but nothing ever worked.
Later, in college, the pattern continued.
The library and my college dorm replaced the unused kitchen at home.
When spring came along, friends would stop by my dorm or peer into my library cubicle to persuade me to play Frisbee on the lawn outside the main building. "
No," I would almost always say, "I have too much to do. "
My college days were gone, but not my need and love for schedules.
They kept me focused.
Justify my time.
My friends and sisters tried to pry me away from my plans in much the same way that my mom tried to coax me out of the kitchen, but they were hardly ever successful.
This summer, though, while house-sitting for my parents, I was persuaded to change my plans in the most unexpected way.
The sight of tomatoes growing in my mother's garden lured me out of my tightly scheduled world.
They drew me with the power of a lover's gaze.
Hundreds of them were turning ripe and red by the minute.
Large beefsteak tomatoes - some doubled but not yet divided - hung heavily or dropped from their vines.
Plum tomatoes - half-green, half-red - and scarlet cherry tomatoes, too many to count, decorated the garden like ornaments on a Christmas tree.
They begged for attention.
" If I have time, I'll make tomato sauce," I told myself.
But my long week in the house by myself was already filled with things to do: writing, building my photography portfolio, and finishing a project that I brought home from the office.
Making tomato sauce was humdrum domestic work that did not contribute to my goals and, more important, wasn't scheduled.
But there they hung from their vines, dropping to the ground with muted thumps, beckoning me.
I picked them and placed them in baskets.
I arranged them, adding string beans, peas, and onions that I pulled from the garden.
I put them in the green house so that the light could hit it just right.
I ate them for lunch and dinner.
I gave them to friends.
But they continued to fall to the ground in even-greater numbers. "
If I have time, I'll make sauce," I told myself one more time.
And again I mentally argued about all the things I had planned and needed to do.
Finally, I gave in.
I picked up the recipe that I had scribbled down from a friend. "
Simmer in a little bit of water with garlic and onions for two hours.
Add sugar, oregano, basil, thyme, rosemary," it read.
I rummaged for 20 minutes in the kitchen cabinet and pulled out a huge white enamel pot.
I washed the tomatoes, cutting away sections that were spoiled, and sliced and threw them into the pot.
I swayed and jiggled the watery mixture as if I were panning for gold.
I tend to work in silence, but at that moment I - yes, spontaneously - decided to turn on the stereo.
I sang along with Billy Joel and reviewed a step I'd picked up in my swing-dance class.
The tomatoes simmered, their aroma blending with the breeze coming in from the open windows.
The old voice returned. "
You should be reading, doing stuff," it told me.
So I lowered the volume but, instead of reading The New York Times Sunday Magazine - as I had planned - I flipped through the furnishings and crafts in Better Homes & Gardens.
It was one of those rare occasions when I ignored the crotchety old voice that spoiled my fun.
Something clicked inside me!
Recalled the moments that could have been!
Looked back on my college days when students crowded in front of the lawn.
I wondered where I might have gone and what I might have done had I accepted more invitations to be among them.
I thought of the conversations that I did not have, the people I never met.
As I sat there flipping through the magazine, I smiled that I didn't listen to the voice that told me I was off schedule.
A 85-year-old lady was asked what she would do if she had her life to live over again.
" I'd make more mistakes next time," she said, "I'd relax.
I would limber up.
I would be sillier than I have been on this trip.
I would take fewer things seriously.
I would take more chances.
I would climb more mountains and swim more rivers.
I would eat more ice cream and fewer beans.
I would perhaps have more actual troubles, but I'd have fewer imaginary ones. "
" You see, I'm one of those people who live sensibly and sanely hour after hour, day after day.
Oh, I've had my moments, and if I had to do it over again, I'd have more of them.
In fact, I'd try to have nothing else.
Just moments, one after another, instead of living so many years ahead of each day.
I've been one of those persons who never goes anywhere without a thermometer, a hot water bottle, and a raincoat.
If I had to do it over again, I would travel lighter than I have. "
" If I had my life to live over, I would start barefoot earlier in the spring and stay that way later in the fall.
I would go to more dances.
I would ride more merry-go-rounds and I would pick more daisies…"
It is well that young men should begin at the
beginning and occupy the most subordinate positions.
Many of the leading businessmen of Pittsburgh had serious responsibility thrust upon them at the very threshold of their career.
They were introduced to the broom, and spent the first hours of their business lives sweeping out the office.
I notice we have janitors and janitresses now in offices, and our young men unfortunately miss that salutary branch of a business education.
But if by chance the professional sweeper is absent any morning, the boy who has the genius of the future partner in him will not hesitate to try his hand at the broom.
The other day a fond fashionable mother in Michigan asked a young man whether he had ever seen a young lady sweep in a room so grandly as her Priscilla.
He said no, he never had, and the mother was gratified beyond measure, but then said he, after a pause, "What I should like to see her do is sweep out a room. "
It does not hurt the newest comer to sweep out the office if necessary.
I was one of those sweepers myself.
Assuming that you have all obtained employment and are fairly started, my advice to you is "aim high".
I would not give a fig for the young man who does not already see himself the partner or the head of an important firm.
Do not rest content for a moment in your thoughts as head clerk, or foreman, or general manager in any concern, no matter how extensive.
Say to yourself, "My place is at the top. "
Be king in your dreams.
And here is the prime condition of success, the great secret: concentrate your energy, thought, and capital exclusively upon the business in which you are engaged.
Having begun in one line, resolve to fight it out on that line, to lead in it, adopt every improvement, have the best machinery, and know the most about it.
The concerns which fail are those which have scattered their capital, which means that they have scattered their brains also.
They have investments in this, or that, or the other, here, there, and everywhere. "
Don't put all your eggs in one basket" is all wrong.
I tell you "put all your eggs in one basket, and then watch that basket. "
Look round you and take notice, men who do that not often fail.
It is easy to watch and carry the one basket.
It is trying to carry too many baskets that breaks most eggs in this country.
He who carries three baskets must put one on his head, which is apt to tumble and trip him up.
One fault of the American businessman is lack of concentration.
To summarize what I have said: Aim for the highest; never enter a bar room; do not touch liquor, or if at all only at meals; never speculate; never indorse beyond your surplus cash fund; make the firm's interest yours; break orders always to save owners; concentrate; put all your eggs in one basket, and watch that basket; expenditure always within revenue; lastly be not impatient, for as Emerson says, "No one can cheat you out of ultimate success but yourselves. "
The hastily scrawled sign on the crumpled cardboard read: BROKE - NEED DOG FOOD.
The desperate young man held the sign in one hand and a leash in the other as he paced back and forth on the busy corner in downtown Las Vegas.
Attached to the leash was a husky pup no more than a year old.
Not far from them was an older dog of the same breed, chained to a lamppost.
He was howling into the brisk chill of the approaching winter evening, with a wail that could be heard for blocks.
It was as though he knew his own fate, for the sign that was propped next to him read: FOR SALE.
Forgetting about my own destination, I quickly turned the car around and made a beeline back toward the homeless trio.
For years, I've kept dog and cat food in the trunk of my car for stray or hungry animals I often find.
It's been a way of helping those I couldn't take in.
It's also what I've used to coax many a scared dog off the road to safety.
Helping needy animals has always been an automatic decision for me.
I pulled into the nearest parking lot and grabbed a five-pound bag of dog food, a container of water and a twenty-dollar bill from my purse.
I approached the ragged-looking man and his unhappy dogs warily.
If this man had somehow hurt these creatures or was using them as come-ons, I knew my anger would quickly take over.
The older dog was staring up at the sky, whining pitifully.
Just before I reached them, a truck pulled up along-side of them and asked how much the man wanted for the older dog.
" Fifty bucks," the man on the corner replied, then added quickly, "but I really don't want to sell him. "
" Is he papered? "
" No. "
" Is he fixed? "
" No. "
" How old is he? "
"Five.
But I really don't want to sell him.
I just need some money to feed him. "
" If I had fifty bucks, I'd buy him. "
The light turned green, and the truck sped off.
The man shook his head and continued dejectedly pacing the sidewalk.
When he noticed me coming in his direction, he stopped walking and watched me approach.
The pup began wagging his tail.
"Hi," I offered, as I drew nearer.
The young man's face was gentle and friendly, and I could sense just by looking in his eyes that he was someone in real crisis.
" I have some food here for your dogs," I said.
Dumbfounded, he took the bag as I set down the water in front of them.
" You brought water, too? "
he asked incredulously.
We both knelt down next to the older dog, and the puppy greeted me enthusiastically.
" That one there is T.C., and this one's Dog.
I'm Wayne. "
The sad, older dog stopped crying long enough to see what was in the container.
" What happened, Wayne? "
I asked.
I felt a bit intrusive, but he answered me directly and simply. "
Well, I just moved out here from Arizona and haven't been able to find work.
I'm at the point where I can't even feed the dogs. "
" Where are you living? "
" That truck right there," he pointed to a dilapidated old vehicle that was parked close by.
It had an extra long bed with a shell, so at least they had shelter from the elements.
The pup had climbed onto my lap and settled in.
I asked Wayne what type of work he did.
" I'm a mechanic and a welder," he said. "
But there's nothing out here for either.
I've looked and looked.
These dogs are my family; I hate to have to sell them, but I just can't afford to feed them. "
He kept saying it over and over.
He didn't want to sell them, but he couldn't feed them.
An awful look came over his face every time he repeated it.
It was as if he might have to give up a child.
The time seemed right to casually pass over the twenty-dollar bill, hoping I wouldn't further damage his already shaky pride. "
Here.
Use this to buy yourself something to eat. "
" Well, thanks," he slowly replied, unable to look me in the face. "
This could get us a room for the night, too. "
" How long have you been out here? "
" All day. "
"Hasn't anyone else stopped? "
" No, you're the first. "
It was late afternoon and quickly getting dark.
Here in the desert, when the sun dropped, the temperature would dip into the thirties.
My mind went fast-forward as I pictured the three of them going without even a single meal today, perhaps for several days, and spending many long, cold hours cooped up in their inadequate, makeshift shelter.
Seeing people beg for food isn't anything new in this city.
But this man stood out because he wasn't asking for food for himself.
He was more concerned with keeping his dogs fed than with his own welfare.
As a pet-parent of nine well-fed and passionately loved dogs of my own, it hit a deep chord in me.
I don't think I'll ever really know what came over me at that moment, inspiring me to do what I did next, but I just knew it was something I had to do.
I asked him if he'd wait there for a few minutes until I returned.
He nodded his head and smiled.
My car flew to the nearest grocery store.
Bursting with urgency, I raced in and took hold of a cart.
I started on the first aisle and didn't quit until I reached the other side of the store.
The items couldn't be pulled off the shelves fast enough.
Just the essentials, I thought.
Just food that will last a couple of weeks and sustain their meager existence.
Peanut butter and jelly.
Bread.
Canned food.
Juice.
Fruit.
Vegetables.
Dog food.
More dog food (forty pound, to be exact).
And chew toys.
They should have some treats, too.
A few other necessities and the job was done.
" The total comes to $102.91," said the checker.
I didn't bat an eye.
The pen ran over that blank check faster than I could legibly write.
It didn't matter that the mortgage was due soon or that I really didn't have the extra hundred dollars to spend.
Nothing mattered besides seeing that this family had some food.
I was amazed at my own intensity and the overwhelming motivation that compelled me to spend a hundred dollars on a total stranger.
Yet, at the same time, I felt like the luckiest person in the world.
To be able to give this man and his beloved companions a tiny bit of something of which I had so much opened the floodgates of gratitude in my own heart.
The icing on the cake was the look on Wayne's face when I returned with all the groceries. "
Here are just a few things… " I said as the dogs looked on with great anticipation.
I wanted to avoid any awkwardness, so I hastily petted the dogs.
" Good luck to you," I said and held out my hand.
" Thank you and God bless you.
Now I won't have to sell my dogs. "
His smile shone brightly in the deepening darkness.
It's true that people are more complicated than animals, but sometimes they can be as easy to read.
Wayne was a good person, someone who looked at a dog and saw family.
In my book, a man like that deserves to be happy.
Later, on my way home, I purposely drove past that same corner.
Wayne and the dogs were gone.
But they have stayed for a long time in my heart and mind.
Perhaps I will run into them again someday.
I like to think that it all turned out well for them.
Why do I not write to you?
And you, a learned man, ask me this?
You should be clever enough to guess that I am in a happy mood because in a word I have made an acquaintance who moves my heart in a strange way.
I have… I do not know.
It is not easy for me to tell you, in chronological order just how it happened, how I met such a lovely being.
I am contented and happy, and therefore not a good historian.
An angel!
Nonsense!
Everyone calls his loved one thus, does he not?
And yet I cannot describe to you how perfect she is, or why she is so perfect; enough to say that she has captured me completely.
So much innocence combined with so much intelligence; such kindness with such firmness; such inner serenity in such an active life.
But all this is foolish talk of abstract words which fail to describe one single feature of her real person.
Another time, no, not another time, right at this moment will tell you everything.
If I do not do it now, it will never be done.
Because between you and me since I began this letter I have been three times on the point of laying down my pen, having my horse saddled and riding out to her.
Although I swore to myself this morning not to do it, I am going every other moment to the window to see how high the sun has climbed.
I could not bear it any longer; I had to see her.
Here I am back, Wilhelm ; I will now eat my supper and then go on writing to you.
What a delight it was to see her among the dear lively children, her eight brothers and sisters!
Day by day I float my paper boats one by one down the running stream.
In big black letters I write my name on them and the name of the village where I live.
I hope that someone in some strange land will find them and know who I am.
I load my little boats with shiuli flowers from our garden, and hope that these blooms of the dawn will be carried safely to land in the night.
I launch my paper boats and look up into the sky and see the little clouds setting their white bulging sails.
I know not what playmate of mine in the sky sends them down the air to race with my boats!
When night comes I bury my face in my arms and dream that my paper boats float on and on under the midnight stars.
The fairies of sleep are sailing in them, and the lading is their baskets full of dreams.
There was a young woman who had been diagnosed with a terminal illness and had been given three months to live.
So as she was getting her things "in order," she contacted her priest and had him come to her house to discuss certain aspects of her final wishes.
She told him which songs she wanted sung at the service, what scriptures she would like read, and what outfit she wanted to be buried in.
Everything was in order and the priest was preparing to leave when the young woman suddenly remembered something very important to her.
" There's one more thing," she said excitedly.
" What's that?"
came the priest's reply.
" This is very important," the young woman continued. "
I want to be buried with a fork in my right hand. "
The priest stood looking at the young woman, not knowing quite what to say.
" That surprises you, doesn't it?"
the young woman asked.
" Well, to be honest, I'm puzzled by the request," said the priest.
The young woman explained, "In all my years of attending socials and dinners, I always remember that when the dishes of the main course were being cleared, someone would inevitably lean over and say, 'Keep your fork.'
It was my favorite part because I knew that something better was coming… like velvety chocolate cake or deep dish apple pie.
Something wonderful, and with substance!'
So, I just want people to see me there in that casket with a fork in my hand and I want them to wonder 'What's with the fork?'
then I want you to tell them: Keep your fork… The best is yet to come. "
The priest's eyes welled up with tears as he hugged the young woman good-bye.
He knew this would be one of the last times he would see her before her death.
But he also knew that the young woman had a better grasp of heaven than he did.
She knew that something better was coming.
At the funeral people were walking by the young woman's casket and they saw the cloak she was wearing and the fork placed in her right hand.
Over and over, the priest heard the question: "What's with the fork? "
And over and over he smiled.
During his message, the priest told the people of the conversation he had with the young woman shortly before she died.
He also told them about the fork and about what it symbolized to her.
The priest told the people how he could not stop thinking about the fork and told them that they probably would not be able to stop thinking about it either.
He was right.
So the next time you reach down for your fork, let it remind you ever so gently, that the best is yet to come.
The stage is more beholding to love, than the life of man.
For as to the stage, love is ever matter of comedies, and now and then of tragedies; but in life it doth much mischief; sometimes like a Siren, sometimes like a Fury.
You may observe, that amongst all the great and worthy persons (whereof the memory remaineth, either ancient or recent) there is not one, that hath been transported to the mad degree of love: which show that great spirits, and great business, do keep out this weak passion.
You must except, nevertheless, Marcus Antonius, the half partner of the empire of Rome, and Appius Claudius, the decemvir and lawgiver; whereof the former was indeed a voluptuous man, and inordinate; but the latter was an austere and wise man; and therefore it seems (though rarely) that love can find entrance, not only into an open heart, but also into a heart well fortified, if watch be not well kept.
It is a poor saying of Epicurus: Satis magnum alter alteri theatrum sumus; as if man, made for the contemplation of heaven, and all noble objects, should do nothing but kneel before a little idol, and make himself a subject, though not of the mouth (as beasts are), yet of the eye; which was given him for higher purposes.
It is a strange thing, to note the excess of this passion, and how it braves the nature, and value of things, by this; that the speaking in a perpetual hyperbole, is comely in nothing but in love.
Neither is it merely in the phrase; for whereas it hath been well said, that the arch-flatterer, with whom all the petty flatterers have intelligence, is a man's self; certainly the lover is more.
For there was never proud man thought so absurdly well of himself, as the lover doth of the person loved; and therefore it was well said, that it is impossible to love, and to be wise.
Neither doth this weakness appear to others only, and not to the party loved; but to the loved most of all, except the love be reciproque.
For it is a true rule, that love is ever rewarded, either with the reciproque, or with an inward and secret contempt.
By how much the more, men ought to beware of this passion, which loseth not only other things, but itself!
As for the other losses, the poet's relation doth well figure them: that he that preferred Helena, quitted the gifts of Juno and Pallas.
For whosoever esteemeth too much of amorous affection, quitteth both riches and wisdom.
I know not how, but martial men are given to love: I think, it is but as they are given to wine; for perils commonly ask to be paid in pleasures.
There is in man's nature, a secret inclination and motion, towards love of others, which if it be not spent upon some one or a few, doth naturally spread itself towards many, and maketh men become humane and charitable; as it is seen sometime in friars.
Nuptial love maketh mankind; friendly love perfecteth it; but wanton love corrupteth, and embaseth it.
A story is told of a king who went into his garden one morning, and found everything withered and dying.
He asked the oak that stood near the gate what the trouble was.
He found it was sick of life and determined to die because it was not tall and beautiful like the pine.
The pine was all out of heart because it could not bear grapes, like the vine.
The vine was going to throw its life away because it could not stand erect and have as fine fruit as the peach tree.
The geranium was fretting because it was not tall and fragrant like the lilac… and so on all through the garden.
Coming to a heart's-ease, he found its bright face lifted as cheery as ever. "
Well, heart's-ease.
I'm glad, amidst all this discouragement, to find one brave little flower.
You do not seem to be the least disheartened. "
" No, I am not of much account, but I thought that if you wanted an oak, or a pine, or a vine, or a peach tree, or a geranium, or a lilac, you would have planted one; but as I knew you wanted a heart's-ease, I am determined to be the best little heart's-ease that I can. "
The cobbler passed his time in singing from morning till night; it was wonderful to see, wonderful to hear him; he was more contented in making shoes, than was any of the seven sages.
His neighbor, on the contrary, who was rolling in wealth, sung but little, and slept less.
He was a banker; when by chance he fell into a doze at daybreak, the cobbler awoke him with his song.
The banker complained sadly that Providence had not made sleep a saleable commodity, like edibles or drinkables.
Having at length sent for the songster, he said to him, "How much a year do you earn, Master George? "
" How much a year, sir?"
said the merry cobbler laughing; "I never reckon in that way, living as I do from one day to another; somehow I manage to reach the end of the year; each day brings its meal. "
" Well then!
How much a day do you earn, my friend? "
" Sometimes more, sometimes less; but the worst of it is - and, without that our earnings would be very tolerable - a number of days occur in the year on which we are forbidden to work; and the curate, moreover, is constantly adding some new saints to the list. "
The banker, laughing at his simplicity, said, "In future I shall place you above want.
Take this hundred crowns, preserve them carefully, and make use of them in time of need. "
The cobbler fancied he beheld all the wealth which the earth had produced in the past century for the use of mankind.
Returning home, he buried his money and his happiness at the same time.
No more singing; he lost his voice, the moment he acquired that which is the source of so much grief.
Sleep quitted his dwelling; and cares, suspicions, and false alarms took its place.
All day, his eye wandered in the direction of his treasure; and at night, if some stray cat made a noise, the cat was robbing him.
At length the poor man ran to the house of his rich neighbor, whom he no longer awoke; "Give me back," said he, "sleep and my voice, and take your hundred crowns. "
Several years ago a farmer owned land along the Atlantic seacoast.
He constantly advertised for hired hands.
Most people were reluctant to work on farms along the Atlantic.
They dreaded the awful storms that raged across the Atlantic, wreaking havoc on the buildings and crops.
As the farmer interviewed applicants for the job, he received a steady stream of refusals.
Finally, a short, thin man, well past middle age, approached the farmer. "
Are you a good farmhand? "
the farmer asked him.
" Well, I can sleep when the wind blows," answered the little man.
Although puzzled by this answer, the farmer, desperate for help, hired him.
The little man worked well around the farm, busy from dawn to dusk, and the farmer felt satisfied with the man's work.
Then one night the wind howled loudly in from offshore.
Jumping out of bed, the farmer grabbed a lantern and rushed next door to the hired hand's sleeping quarters.
He shook the little man and yelled, "Get up!
A storm is coming!
Tie things down before they blow away! "
The little man rolled over in bed and said firmly, "No, sir.
I told you, I can sleep when the wind blows. "
Enraged by the response, the farmer was tempted to fire him on the spot.
Instead, he hurried outside to prepare for the storm.
To his amazement, he discovered that all of the haystacks had been covered with tarpaulins.
The cows were in the barn, the chickens were in the coops, and the doors were barred.
The shutters were tightly secured.
Everything was tied down.
Nothing could blow away.
The farmer then understood what his hired hand meant, so he returned to his bed to sleep while the wind blew, too.
When you're prepared, spiritually, mentally, and physically, you have nothing to fear.
Can you sleep when the wind blows through your life?
The hired hand in the story was able to sleep because he had secured the farm against the storm.
In the morning of life came a good fairy with her basket, and said to a young man: "Here are gifts.
Take one, leave the others.
And be wary, choose wisely!
For only one of them is valuable. "
The gifts were five: Fame, Love, Riches, Pleasure, Death.
The youth said eagerly: "There is no need to consider"; and he chose Pleasure.
He went out into the world and sought out the pleasures that youth delights in.
But each in its turn was short-lived and disappointing, vain and empty; and each, departing, mocked him.
In the end he said: "These years I have wasted.
If I could but choose again, I would choose wisely. "
The fairy appeared, and said: "Four of the gifts remain.
Choose once more; and oh, remember - time is flying, and only one of them is precious. "
The man considered long, then chose Love; and did not mark the tears that rose in the fairy's eyes.
After many, many years the man sat by a coffin, in an empty home.
And he communed with himself, saying: "One by one they have gone away and left me; and now she lies here, the dearest and the last.
Desolation after desolation has swept over me; for each hour of happiness the treacherous trader, Love, as sold me I have paid a thousand hours of grief!
Out of my heart of hearts I curse him! "
"Choose again. "
It was the fairy speaking. "
The years have given you wisdom - surely it must be so.
Three gifts remain.
Only one of them has any worth - remember it, and choose warily. "
The man reflected long, then chose Fame; and the fairy, sighing, went her way.
Years went by and she came again, and stood behind the man where he sat solitary in the fading day, thinking.
And she knew his thought: "My name filled the world, and its praises were on every tongue, and it seemed well with me for a little while.
How little a while it was!
Then came envy; then detraction; then hate; then persecution.
Then derision, which is the beginning of the end.
And last of all came pity, which is the funeral of fame.
Oh, the bitterness and misery of renown! "
"Choose yet again. "
It was the fairy's voice.
" Two gifts remain.
And do not despair.
In the beginning there was but one that was precious, and it is still here. "
" Wealth - which is power!
How blind I was!"
said the man. "
Now, at last, life will be worth the living.
I will spend, squander.
These mockers and despisers will crawl in the dirt before me, and I will feed my hungry heart with their envy.
I will have all luxuries, all joys, all enchantments of the spirit.
I will buy, buy, buy!
I have lost much time, and chosen badly heretofore, but let that pass; I was ignorant then, and could but take for best what seemed so. "
Three short years went by, and a day came when the man sat shivering in a mean garret; and he was gaunt and wan and hollow-eyed, and clothed in rags; and he was gnawing a dry crust and mumbling: "Curse all the world's gifts, for mockeries and gilded lies!
And miscalled, every one.
They are not gifts, but merely lendings.
Pleasure, Love, Fame, Riches: they are but temporary disguises for lasting realities - Pain, Grief, Shame, Poverty.
The fairy said true; in all her store there was but one gift which was precious, only one that was not valueless.
How poor and cheap and mean I know those others now to be.
Bring it!
I am weary, I would rest. "
The fairy came, bringing again four of the gifts, but Death was wanting.
She said: "I gave it to a mother's pet, a little child.
It was ignorant, but trusted me, asking me to choose for it.
You did not ask me to choose. "
" Oh, miserable me!
What is left for me? "
" What not even you have deserved: the wanton insult of Old Age. "
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed,
And every fair from fair sometimes declines,
By chance or nature's changing course untrimmed:
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
Nor shall death brag thou wand'rest in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
My five-year-old son, Jack, had been asking for a puppy for over a month, but his daddy kept saying, "No dogs!
A dog will dig up the garden and chase the ducks and kill our rabbits.
No dogs, and that's final! "
Each night Jack prayed for a puppy, and each morning he was disappointed when there was no puppy waiting outside.
I was peeling potatoes for dinner, and he was sitting on the floor at my feet asking for the thousandth time, "Why won't Daddy let me have a puppy? "
" Because they are a lot of trouble.
Don't cry.
Maybe Daddy will change his mind someday," I encouraged him.
" No, he won't and I'll never have a puppy in a million years," Jack wailed.
I looked into his dirty, tear-streaked face.
How could we deny him his one wish?
So I said the words that were first spoken by Eve, "I know a way to make Daddy change his mind. "
"Really?"
Jack wiped away his tears and sniffed.
I handed him a potato.
"Take this and carry it with you until it turns into a puppy," I whispered. "
Never let it out of your sight for one minute.
Keep it with you all the time, and on the third day, tie a string around it and drag it around the yard and see what happens! "
Jack grabbed the potato with both hands. "
Mama, how do you make a potato into a puppy? "
He turned it over and over in his little hands.
"Shh!
It's a secret! "
I whispered and sent him on his way.
" Lord, you know what a woman must do to keep peace in her home! "
I prayed.
Jack faithfully carried his potato around for two days; he slept with it, bathed with it and talked to it.
On the third day I said to my husband, "We really should get a pet for Jack. "
" What makes you think he needs a pet? "
My husband leaned against the doorway.
" Well, he's been carrying a potato around with him for days.
He calls it Tom and says it is his pet.
He sleeps with it on his pillow, and right now he has a string tied to it and he's dragging it around the yard, "I said.
" A potato? "
my husband asked and looked out of the window and watched Jack taking his potato for a walk.
" It will break his heart when the potato gets mushy and rots," I said and started getting out food for lunch. "
Besides, every time I try to peel potatoes for dinner, Jack cries because he says I'm killing Tom's family. "
" A potato? "
my husband asked. "
My son has a pet potato? "
" Well," I said shrugging, "you said he couldn't have a puppy.
He was so disappointed, in his mind, he decided he had to have a pet…"
" That's crazy! "
my husband said.
" Maybe you're right, but explain to me why he is dragging that potato around the yard on a string," I said.
My husband watched our son for a few more minutes.
" I'll bring home a puppy tonight.
I'll stop by the animal shelter after work.
I guess a puppy can't be that much trouble," he sighed. "
It's better than a potato. "
That night Jack's daddy brought home a wiggling puppy and a pregnant white cat that he took pity on while he was at the shelter.
Everyone was happy.
My husband thought he'd saved his son from a nervous breakdown.
Jack had a puppy, a cat and five kittens and believed his mother had magic powers that could change a potato into a puppy.
And I was happy because I got my potato back and cooked it for dinner.
Everything was perfect until one evening when I was cooking dinner, Jack tugged on my dress and asked, "Mama, do you think I could have a pony for my birthday? "
I looked into his sweet little face and said, "Well, first we have to take a watermelon…"
A group of professional people asked this question to a group of 4-to-8-year-old children. "
What does love mean? "
The answers were surprising and no one could have predicted that the children would answer like they did below.
" When my grandmother hurt her knees, she couldn't bend over and paint her toenails anymore.
So my grandfather does it for her all the time, even when his hands hurt too.
That's love. "
Rebecca - age 8
" Love is when someone hurts you and you get so mad, but you won't yell at them because you know it would hurt their feelings. "
Samantha - age 6
" Love is what makes you smile when you're tired. "
Terri - age 4
" I let my big sister pick on me because my mom says she only picks on me because she loves me.
So I pick on my baby sister because I love her. "
Bethany - age 4
" I know my older sister loves me because she gives me all her old clothes and has to go out and buy new clothes. "
Lauren - age 4
" Love is when Mommy gives Daddy the best piece of chicken. "
Elaine - age 5
" My mommy loves me more than anybody.
You don't see anyone else kissing me to sleep at night. "
Clare - age 5
" Love is when you tell a guy you like his shirt, then he wears it everyday. "
Noelle - age 7
" You really shouldn't say 'I love you' unless you mean it.
But if you mean it, you should say it a lot.
People forget. "
Jessica - age 8
A man and his girlfriend were married.
It was a large celebration.
All of their friends and family came to see the lovely ceremony and to partake of the festivities and celebrations.
All had a wonderful time.
The bride was gorgeous in her white wedding gown and the groom was very dashing in his black tuxedo.
Everyone could tell that the love they had for each other was true.
A few months later, the wife came to the husband with a proposal, "I read in a magazine, a while ago, about how we can strengthen our marriage," she offered. "
Each of us will write a list of the things that we find a bit annoying with the other person.
Then, we can talk about how we can fix them together and make our lives happier together. "
The husband agreed.
So each of them went to a separate room in the house and thought of the things that annoyed them about the other.
They thought about this question for the rest of the day and wrote down what they came up with.
The next morning, at the breakfast table, they decided that they would go over their lists.
" I'll start," offered the wife.
She took out her list.
It had many items on it.
Enough to fill 3 pages, in fact.
As she started reading the list of the little annoyances, she noticed that tears were starting to appear in her husband's eyes.
" What's wrong? "
she asked. "
Nothing," the husband replied, "keep reading your list. "
The wife continued to read until she had read all three pages to her husband.
She neatly placed her list on the table and folded her hands over the top of it.
" Now, you read your list and then we'll talk about the things on both of our lists," she said happily.
Quietly the husband stated, "I don't have anything on my list.
I think that you are perfect the way that you are.
I don't want you to change anything for me.
You are lovely and wonderful and I wouldn't want to try and change anything about you. "
The wife, touched by his honesty and the depth of his love for her and his acceptance of her, turned her head and wept.
In life, there are enough times when we are disappointed, depressed and annoyed.
We don't really have to go looking for them.
We have a wonderful world that is full of beauty, light and promise.
Why waste time in this world looking for the bad, disappointing or annoying when we can look around us, and see the wondrous things before us?
The old monk often took the young monk to the hill outside the temple to recite the lection.
One day the young monk said to the old monk, "How slowly the time goes! "
The old monk said, "You can have a try like this - in the morning sit to the west to read; and in the afternoon sit to the east to read. "
At the master's advice, the young monk recited the lection against the sun.
By and by he neglected the passage of time.
The next day he told the old monk, "Master, you're so masterly that I forget time with a switch of direction and absorb myself in the lection. "
The old monk said, "Whatever you do, only when you leave time behind you can you focus on it selflessly. "
Once upon a time there was a child ready to be born.
So one day he asked God, "They tell me you are sending me to earth tomorrow, but how am I going to live there being so small and helpless? "
God replied, "Among the many angels, I chose one for you.
She will be waiting for you and will take care of you. "
But the child wasn't sure if he really wanted to go. "
But here in Heaven, I do nothing but singing and smiling.
That's enough for me to be happy. "
" Your angel will sing for you and will also smile to you every day.
And you will feel your angel's love and be happy. "
" And how am I going to be able to understand when people talk to me," the child continued, "if I don't know the language that men talk? "
God patted him on the head and said, "Your angel tell you the most beautiful and sweetest words you ever hear, and with much patience and care, your angel will teach you how to speak. "
" I've heard that on earth there are bad men.
Who will protect me? "
" Your angel will defend you even if it means risking her life! "
At that moment voices from the earth could already be heard.
The child knew he had to start on his journey very soon.
He asked one more question. "
If I am about to leave now, please tell me my angel's name. "
God touched the child on the shoulder and answered, "Your angel's name is not hard to remember.
You will simply call her Mommy. "
The farthest distance in the world
Is not the distance between life and death,
But you don't know I love you when I stand in front of you.
The farthest distance in the world
Is not you don't know I love you when I stand in front of you,
But I cannot say I love you when I love you so madly.
The farthest distance in the world
Is not I cannot say I love you when I love you so madly,
But I can only bury it in my heart despite the unbearable yearning.
The farthest distance in the world
Is not I can only bury it in my heart despite the unbearable yearning,
But we cannot be together when we love each other.
The farthest distance in the world
Is not we cannot be together when we love each other,
But we pretend caring nothing even we know love is unconquerable.
The farthest distance in the world
Is not the distance between two trees,
But the branches cannot depend on each other in wind even they grow from the same root.
The farthest distance in the world
Is not the branches cannot depend on each other,
But two stars cannot meet even they watch each other.
The farthest distance in the world
Is not the track between two stars,
But they are nowhere to search in a tick after two tracks join.
The farthest distance in the world
Is not they are nowhere to search in a tick,
But they are doomed not to be together before they meet.
The farthest distance in the world
Is the distance between fish and bird:
One is in the sky, another in the sea.
Youth is not a time of life; it is a state of mind; it is not a matter of rosy cheeks, red lips and supple knees; it is a matter of the will, a quality of the imagination, a vigor of the emotions; it is the freshness of the deep springs of life.
Youth means a temperamental predominance of courage over timidity, of the appetite for adventure over the love of ease.
This often exists in a man of sixty more than a body of twenty.
Nobody grows old merely by a number of years.
We grow old by deserting our ideals.
Years may wrinkle the skin, but to give up enthusiasm wrinkles the soul.
Worry, fear, self-distrust bows the heart and turns the spirit back to dust.
Whether sixty or sixteen, there is in every human being's heart the lure of wonder, the unfailing childlike appetite for what's next and the joy of the game of living.
In the center of your heart and my heart there is a wireless station: so long as it receives messages of beauty, hope, cheer, courage and power from men and from the Infinite, so long are you young.
When the aerials are down, and your spirit is covered with snows of cynicism and the ice of pessimism, then you are grown old, even at twenty; but as long as your aerials are up, to catch waves of optimism, there is hope you may die young at eighty.
I love you, beloved.
Forgive me my love.
Like a bird losing its way I am caught.
When my heart was shaken it lost its veil and was naked.
Cover it with pity, beloved, and forgive me my love.
If you cannot love me, beloved, forgive me my pain.
Do not look askance at me from afar.
I will steal back to my corner and sit in the dark.
With both hands I will cover my naked shame.
Turn your face from me, beloved, and forgive me my pain.
If you love me, beloved, forgive me my joy.
When my heart is borne away by the flood of happiness, do not smile at my perilous abandonment.
When I sit on my throne and rule you with my tyranny of love, when like a goddess I grant you my favour, bear with my pride, beloved, and forgive me my joy.
He met her at a party.
She was outstanding.
Many guys were after her, but nobody paid any attention to him.
After the party, he invited her for coffee.
She was surprised.
So as not to appear rude, she went along.
As they sat in a nice coffee shop, he was too nervous to say anything and she felt uncomfortable, too.
Suddenly, he asked the waiter: "Could you please give me some salt?
I'd like to put it in my coffee. "
They stared at him.
He turned red, but when the salt came, he put it in his coffee and drank.
Curiously, she asked: "Why is salt with coffee?"
He explained: "When I was a little boy, I lived near the sea.
I liked playing in the sea - I could feel it taste salty, like salty coffee.
Now every time I drink it, I think of my childhood and my hometown.
I miss it and my parents, who are still there. "
She was deeply touched.
A man who can admit that he's homesick must love his home and care about his family.
He must be responsible.
She talked too, about her faraway hometown, her childhood, her family.
That was the start of their love story.
They continued to date.
She found that he met all her requirements.
He was tolerant, kind, warm and careful.
And to think she would have missed the catch if not for the salty coffee!
So they married and lived happily together.
And every time she made coffee for him, she put in some salt, the way he liked it.
After 40 years, he passed away and left her a letter which said:
My dearest, please forgive my life-long lie.
Remember the first time we dated?
I was so nervous that I asked for salt instead of sugar.
It was hard for me to ask for a change, so I just went ahead.
I never thought that we would hit it off.
Many times, I tried to tell you the truth, but I was afraid that it would ruin everything.
Sweetheart, I don't exactly like salty coffee.
But as it mattered so much to you, I've learnt to enjoy it.
Having you with me was my greatest happiness.
If I could live a second time, I hope we can be together again, even if it means that I have to drink salty coffee for the rest of my life.
The abandoned campus,
Empty brick buildings and early June
When you came to visit me;
Crossing the states midway,
The straggled belts of little roads;
Hitchhiking with your portable typewriter.
The campus, an academy of trees,
Under which some hand, the wind's I guess,
Had scattered the pale light
Of thousands of spring beauties,
Petals stained with pink veins;
Secret, blooming for themselves.
We sat among them.
Your long fingers, thin body,
And long bones of improbable genius;
Some scattered gene as Kafka must have had.
Your deep voice, this passing dust of miracles.
That simple that was myself, half conscious,
As though each moment was a page
Where words appeared; the bent hammer of the type
Struck against the moving ribbon.
The light air, the restless leaves;
The ripple of time warped by our longing.
There, as if we were painted
By some unknown impressionist.
The hand that clasps mine is not that of the child I can still remember, but that of the man he has become.
From that hand to his face to the smile he beams at me, he is his father in days gone by.
We move gracefully across the floor as his young bride looks on.
My new daughter.
Oh, how the years have passed!
It seems I didn't even notice.
One day, I held a squalling infant in my exhausted arms and counted tiny pink fingers and toes.
The next, I'm no longer the most important woman in his life.
An effortless spin and he's taking me across the floor with a flare like his father's.
I wonder if he's looking down on us at this moment as my son's eyes sparkle with his mischief.
Suddenly, I'm bent backward and laughing like a girl half my age, my young rogue leaning over me and the guests applauding.
He kisses my cheek and spins me upright again.
The regretful tears of the past threaten my eyes.
No, they are not regretful tears.
I have no regrets where this boy - this man - is concerned.
He has been, and always will be, my pure joy.
Time cannot wipe away the sadness and heartache, but there was never regret!
Heartache comes with having children as it does with being alive.
If my son is all he wants to be, I have no regrets.
As the music slows, his mood seems to waver.
Knowing that if I see any of what I'm feeling in his eyes I will surely cry, I move into his arms and rest my head on his strong shoulder.
A hush has descended on the entire room; not even the babies are fussing.
The gentle piano guides us around the floor, passed faces that have always been near, and new ones destined for the same.
Their smiles bring one to my face as I realize this is not a day for tears.
The hand against my back gives me a squeeze.
It is a most subtle gesture to let me know my new daughter's turn to care for him has come.
It is not a day for tears, but they threaten nonetheless.
I sigh and touch his smooth cheek, seeing the face of a baby, child, teen, and man.
Is this day so difficult for all mothers?
I can't help wondering.
As the music switches with ease to the one he chose to dance to with his bride, I turn and find her shy face with my other hand.
I can't speak to either, but I know that my heart is in my eyes as each receives my kiss.
Walking to the edge of the floor, I suddenly realize I do have one regret today.
I regret that my husband is not here to hold my hand.
When I was a boy, there was but one permanent ambition among my comrades in our village on the west bank of the Mississippi River.
That was, to be a steamboatman.
We had transient ambitions of other sorts, but they were only transient.
When a circus came and went, it left us all burning to become clowns; the first negro minstrel show that came to our section left us all suffering to try that kind of life; now and then we had a hope that if we lived and were good, God would permit us to be pirates.
These ambitions faded out, each in its turn; but the ambition to be a steamboatman always remained.
Once a day a cheap, gaudy packet arrived upward from St. Louis, and another downward from Keokuk.
Before these events, the day was glorious with expectancy; after them, the day was a dead and empty thing.
Not only the boys, but the whole village, felt this.
After all these years I can picture that old time to myself now, just as it was then.
My father was a justice of the peace, and I supposed he possessed the power of life and death over all men and could hang anybody that offended him.
This was distinction enough for me as a general thing; but the desire to be a steamboatman kept intruding, nevertheless.
I first wanted to be a cabin-boy, so that I could come out with a white apron on and shake a tablecloth over the side, where all my old comrades could see me; later I thought I would rather be the deckhand who stood on the end of the stage-plank with the coil of rope in his hand, because he was particularly conspicuous.
But these were only day-dreams - they were too heavenly to be contemplated as real possibilities.
By and by one of our boys went away.
He was not heard of for a long time.
At last he turned up as apprentice engineer or "striker" on a steamboat.
This thing shook the bottom out of all my Sunday-school teachings.
That boy had been notoriously worldly, and I just the reverse; yet he was exalted to this eminence, and I left in obscurity and misery.
There was nothing generous about this fellow in his greatness.
He would always manage to have a rusty bolt to scrub while his boat tarried at our town, and he would sit on the inside guard and scrub it, where we could all see him and envy him and loathe him.
And whenever his boat was laid up he would come home and swell around the town in his blackest and greasiest clothes, so that nobody could help remembering that he was a steamboatman; and he used all sorts of steamboat technicalities in his talk, as if he were so used to them that he forgot common people could not understand them.
Two or three of the boys had long been persons of consideration among us because they had been to St. Louis once and had a vague general knowledge of its wonders, but the day of their glory was over now.
They lapsed into a humble silence, and learned to disappear when the ruthless "cub" -engineer approached.
This fellow had money, too, and hair oil.
Also an ignorant silver watch and a showy brass watch chain.
He wore a leather belt and used no suspenders.
If ever a youth was cordially admired and hated by his comrades, this one was.
No girl could withstand his charms.
He "cut out" every boy in the village.
When his boat blew up at last, it diffused a tranquil contentment among us such as we had not known for months.
But when he came home the next week, alive, renowned, and appeared in church all battered up and bandaged, a shining hero, stared at and wondered over by everybody, it seemed to us that the partiality of Providence for an undeserving reptile had reached a point where it was open to criticism.
My husband, John, and I had always thought we hated cats.
We just didn't like them - never owned one, never fed strays, avoided petting them.
We weren't cat people.
Then one rainy spring day, a patchwork-colored cat came around.
I was about to shoo her away, but she looked so miserable I felt sorry for her.
The least I could do was leave her some food.
She kept coming back for more, and I got to petting her.
Patches, I called her.
It wasn't long before another cat showed up, gray with a white chest.
I named her Fluffy.
Soon she had a black kitten, Midnight.
Then two lovely white angoras came around, Pete and Repeat.
" What are we running, a cat sanctuary?"
John grumbled.
But I couldn't turn them away.
I liked caring for them.
I started to worry about what would happen to them in cold weather and asked John what we should do.
He didn't say much.
Then on a cool fall day, driving home from a meeting at church, I was still wondering what to do about my cats in the cold winter.
My cats!
I pulled into the driveway, and saw the most amazing sight.
There sitting on our porch was the neatest cathouse you could ever find!
John had built it, with beige carpet covering the floor, a little porch on the front and wooden shingles on the roof.
" It's perfect," I said to John. "
But I didn't think you liked the cats. "
" I guess they've grown on me," he said sheepishly.
" I guess they've grown on us both," I said, smiling.
Yes!
I will steal from the world, and not a babbling tongue shall tell where I am, - Echo shall not so much as whisper my hiding place, - suffer thy imagination to paint it as a little sun-gilt cottage, on the side of a romantic hill; - dost thou think I will leave love and friendship behind me?
No!
They shall be my companions in solitude, for they will sit down and rise up with me in the amiable form of my L - .
We will be as merry and as innocent as our first parents in Paradise, before the arch-fiend entered that indescribable scene.
The kindest affections will have room to shoot and expand in our retirement, and produce such fruit as madness, and envy, and ambition, have always killed in the bud. -
Let the human tempest and hurricane rage at a distance, the desolation is beyond the horizon of peace. -
My L. has seen a polyanthus blow in December - some friendly wall has sheltered it from the biting wind. -
No planetary influence shall reach us, but that which presides and cherishes the sweetest flowers.
God preserve us!
How delightful this prospect in idea!
We will build and we will plant in our own way - simplicity shall not be tortured by art - We will learn of nature how to live - she shall be our alchymist to mingle all the good of life into one salubrious draught. -
The gloomy family of care and distrust shall be banished from our dwelling, guarded by thy kind and tutelary deity; - we will sing our choral songs of gratitude, and rejoice to the end of our pilgrimage.
Adieu, my L. Return to one who languishes for your society.
Books are a guide in youth and an entertainment for age.
They support us under solitude, and keep us from being a burden to ourselves.
- Jeremy Collier
The only true equalizers in the world are books; the only treasure-house open to all comers is a library.
- Dr. Langford
Perhaps no other thing has such power to lift the poor out of his poverty, the wretched out of his misery, to make the burden-bearer forget his burden, the sick his suffering, the sorrower his grief, the downtrodden his degradation, as books.
They are friends to the lonely, companions to the deserted, joy to the joyless, hope to the hopeless, good cheer to the disheartened, a helper to the helpless.
They bring light into darkness, and sunshine into shadow.
We may be poor, socially ostracized, shut out from all personal association with the great and the good, and yet be in the best society in the world, in books.
We may live in palaces, converse with princes, be familiar with royalty, and associate with the greatest and noblest of all time.
The trend of many a life for good or ill, for success or failure, has been determined by a single book.
The books which we read early in life are those which influence us most.
We form many of our opinions from our favourite books.
The author whom we prefer is our most potent teacher, we look at the world through his eyes.
If we habitually read books that are elevating in tone, pure in style, sound in reasoning, and keen in insight, our minds develop the same characteristics.
If, on the contrary, we read weak or vicious books, our minds contract the faults and vices of the books.
We cannot escape the influence of what we read any more than we can escape the influence of the air that we breathe.
The best books are those which stir us up most and make us the most determined to do something and be something ourselves.
The best books are those which lift us to a higher plane where we breathe a purer atmosphere.
As we should associate with people who can inspire us to nobler deeds, so we should only read those books which have an uplifting power, and which stir us to make the most of ourselves and our opportunities.
Emerson had three rules for reading: never read a book that is not a year old; never read any but famous books; never read a book you do not like.
Libraries are no longer a luxury, but a necessity.
A home without books and periodicals and newspapers is like a house without windows.
Children learn to read by being in the midst of books; they unconsciously absorb knowledge by handling them.
No family can now afford to be without good reading.
Furnish your house with books rather than unnecessary furniture, or even pictures if you cannot afford all.
Wear threadbare clothes and patched shoes if necessary, but do not pinch or economize on books.
If you cannot give your children an academic education, you can place within their reach a few good books which will lift them above their surroundings into respectability and honour.
" No entertainment is so cheap as reading," says Mary Wortley Montagu, "nor any pleasure so lasting. "
Good books elevate the character, purify the taste, take the attractiveness out of low pleasure, and lift us upon a higher plane of thinking and living.
It is not easy to be mean directly after reading a noble and inspiring book.
The conversation of a man who reads for improvement or pleasure will be flavored by his reading; but it will not be about his reading.
Whatever you read, read with enthusiasm, with energy, read with the whole mind, if you would increase your mental stature, learn to absorb the mental and the moral life of a book, and assimilate it into your life.
He is the best reader who consumes the most knowledge and converts it into character.
Mechanical readers remember words, the husks of things, but digest nothing.
They cram their brains but starve their minds.
If you are getting the most out of a book, you will feel a capacity for doing things which you never felt before.
Tucked away in our subconsciousness is an idyllic vision.
We see ourselves on a long trip that spans the continent.
We are traveling by train.
Out of the windows, we drink in the passing scene of cars on nearby highways, of children waving at a crossing, of cattle grazing on a distant hillside, of smoke pouring from a power plant, of row upon row of corn and wheat, of flatlands and valleys, of mountains and rolling hillsides, of city skylines and village halls.
But uppermost in our minds is the final destination.
On a certain day at a certain hour, we will pull into the station.
Bands will be playing and flags waving.
Once we get there, so many wonderful dreams will come true and the pieces of our lives will fit together like a completed jigsaw puzzle.
How restlessly we pace the aisles, damning the minutes for loitering - waiting, waiting, waiting for the station.
" When we reach the station, that will be it! "
We cry. "
When I'm 18." "
When I buy a new 450SL Mercedes Benz!" "
When I put the last kid through college. " "
When I have paid off the mortgage!" "
When I get a promotion. " "
When I reach the age of retirement, I shall live happily ever after! "
Sooner or later, we must realize there is no station, no one place to arrive at once and for all.
The true joy of life is the trip.
The station is only a dream.
It constantly outdistances us.
It isn't the burdens of today that drive men mad.
It is the regrets over yesterday and the fear of tomorrow.
Regret and fear are twin thieves who rob us of today.
So stop pacing the aisles and counting the miles.
Instead, climb more mountains, eat more ice cream, go barefoot more often, swim more rivers, watch more sunsets, laugh more, cry less.
Life must be lived as we go along.
The station will come soon enough.
I will practice perseverance oftener, and never give up a thing because it was hard or inconvenient.
If we want light, we must conquer darkness.
Perseverance can sometimes equal genius in its results. "
There are only two creatures," says a proverb, "who can surmount the pyramids - the eagle and the snail. "
I will school myself into a habit of attention.
I would let nothing come between me and the subject in hand.
I would remember that a good skater never tries to skate in two directions at once.
The habit of attention becomes part of our life, if we begin early enough.
I often hear grown-up people say, "I could not fix my attention on the lecture or book, although I wished to do so," and the reason is, the habit was not formed in youth.
I will pay more attention to the cultivation of the memory.
I would strengthen that faculty by every possible means, and on every possible occasion.
It takes a little hard work at first to remember things accurately, but memory soon helps itself, and gives very little trouble.
It only needs early cultivation to become a power.
I will look on the cheerful side.
Life is very much like a mirror: if you smile upon it, it smiles back upon you; but if you frown and look doubtful on it, you will get a similar look in return.
Tom and Jane were an ordinary couple.
They lived in an ordinary house on an ordinary street.
Like any other ordinary couple, they struggled to make ends meet and to do the right things for their children.
They were ordinary in yet another way - they had their squabbles.
Much of their conversation concerned what was wrong in their marriage and who was to blame.
Until one day when a most extraordinary event took place.
" You know, Jane, I've got a magic chest with many drawers.
Every time I open them, they're full of socks and underwear," Tom said. "
I want to thank you for filling them all these years. "
Jane stared at her husband over the top of her glasses. "
What do you want, Tom? "
" Nothing.
I just want you to know I appreciate those magic drawers. "
This wasn't the first time Tom had done something odd, so Jane pushed the incident out of her mind until a few days later.
" Jane, thank you for recording so many correct check numbers in the ledger this month.
You put down the right numbers 15 out of 16 times.
That's a record. "
Disbelieving what she had heard, Jane looked up from her mending. "
Tom, you're always complaining about my recording the wrong check numbers.
Why stop now? "
" No reason.
I just wanted you to know I appreciate the effort you're making. "
Jane shook her head and went back to her mending. "
What's got into him? "
she mumbled to herself.
Nevertheless, the next day when Jane wrote a check at the grocery store, she glanced at her checkbook to confirm that she had put down the right check number. "
Why do I suddenly care about those dumb check numbers? "
she asked herself.
She tried to disregard the incident, but Tom's strange behavior intensified.
" Jane, that was a great dinner," he said one evening. "
I appreciate all your effort.
Why, in the past 15 years I'll bet you've fixed over 14,000 meals for me and the kids. "
Then, "Gee, Jane, the house looks so tidy.
You've really worked hard to get it looking so good. "
And even, "Thanks, Jane, for just being you.
I really enjoy your company. "
Jane was growing worried. "
Where's the sarcasm, the criticism? "
she wondered.
Her fears that something peculiar was happening to her husband were confirmed by 15-year-old Emi, who complained, "Dad's gone bonkers, Mom.
He just told me I looked nice.
With all this makeup and these sloppy clothes, he still said it.
That's not Dad, Mom.
What's wrong with him? "
Whatever was wrong, Tom didn't get over it.
Day in and day out, he continued focusing on the positive.
Over the weeks, Jane grew more accustomed to her mate's unusual behavior and occasionally even gave him a grudged "Thank you".
She prided herself on taking it all in stride, until one day something so peculiar happened, she became completely confused.
" I want you to take a break," Tom said. "
I am going to do the dishes.
So please take your hands off that frying pan and leave the kitchen. "
"Thank you, Tom.
Thank you very much! "
Jane's step was now a little lighter, her self-confidence higher and once in a while she hummed.
She didn't seem to have as many blue moods anymore. "
I rather like Tom's new behavior," she thought.
That would be the end of the story except one day another most extraordinary event took place.
This time it was Jane who spoke.
" Tom," she said, "I want to thank you for going to work and providing for us all these years.
I don't think I've ever told you how much I appreciate it. "
Tom has never revealed the reason for his dramatic change of behavior no matter how hard Jane has pushed for an answer, and so it will likely remain one of life's mysteries.
But it's one I'm thankful to live with.
You see, I am Jane.
Hands cling to hands and eyes linger on eyes: thus begins the record of our hearts.
It is the moonlit night of March; the sweet smell of henna is in the air; my flute lies on the earth neglected and your garland of flowers is unfinished.
This love between you and me is simple as a song.
Your veil of the saffron colour makes my eyes drunk.
The jasmine wreath that you wove me thrills to my heart like praise.
It is a game of giving and withholding, revealing and screening again; some smiles and some little shyness, and some sweet useless struggles.
This love between you and me is simple as a song.
No mystery beyond the present; no striving for the impossible; no shadow behind the charm; no groping in the depth of the dark.
This love between you and me is simple as a song.
We do not stray out of all words into the ever silent; We do not raise our hands to the void for things beyond hope.
It is enough what we give and we get.
We have not crushed the joy to the utmost to wring from it the wine of pain.
This love between you and me is simple as a song.
In the matter of courage we all have our limits.
There never was a hero who did not have his bounds.
I suppose it may be said of Nelson and all the others whose courage has been advertised that there came times in their lives when their bravery knew it had come to its limit.
I have found mine a good many times.
Sometimes this was expected - often it was unexpected.
I know a man who is not afraid to sleep with a rattlesnake, but you could not get him to sleep with a safety-razor.
I never had the courage to talk across a long, narrow room I should be at the end of the room facing all the audience.
If I attempt to talk across a room I find myself turning this way and that, and thus at alternate periods I have part of the audience behind me.
You ought never to have any part of the audience behind you; you never can tell what they are going to do.
I'll sit down.
Just one last dance… oh baby… just one last dance
We meet in the night in the Spanish café
I look in your eyes just don't know what to say
It feels like I'm drowning in salty water
A few hours left 'til the sun's gonna rise
Tomorrow will come and it's time to realize: Our love has finished forever
How I wish to come with you!
How I wish we make it through!
Just one last dance before we say goodbye
When we sway and turn round and round and round
It's like the first time
Just one more chance
Hold me tight and keep me warm
'Cause the night is getting cold and I don't know where I belong
Just one last dance
The wine and the lights and the Spanish guitar
I'll never forget how romantic they are
But I know, tomorrow I'll lose the one I love
There's no way to come with you.
It's the only thing to do:
Just one last dance before we say goodbye
When we sway and turn round and round and round
It's like the first time
Just one more chance
Hold me tight and keep me warm
'Cause the night is getting cold and I don't know where I belong
Just one last dance
Just one last dance and just one more chance
Just one last dance
The "Avenue", so called by the Newbridge people, was a stretch of road four or five hundred yards long, completely arched over with huge, wide-spreading apple trees, planted years ago by an eccentric old farmer.
Overhead was one long canopy of snowy fragrant bloom.
Below the boughs the air was full of a purple twilight and far ahead a glimpse of painted sunset sky shone like a great rose window at the end of a cathedral aisle.
Its beauty seemed to strike the child dumb.
She leaned back in the buggy, her thin hands clasped before her, her face lifted rapturously to the white splendor above.
Even when they had passed out and were driving down the long slope to Newbridge she never moved or spoke.
Still with rapt face she gazed afar into the sunset west, with eyes that saw visions trooping splendidly across that glowing background.
Through Newbridge, a bustling little village where dogs barked at them and small boys hooted and curious faces peered from the windows, they drove, still in silence.
When three more miles had dropped away behind them the child had not spoken.
She could keep silence, it was evident, as energetically as she could talk.
" I guess you're feeling pretty tired and hungry," Matthew ventured to say at last, accounting for her long visitation of dumbness with the only reason he could think of. "
But we haven't very far to go now - only another mile. "
She came out of her reverie with a deep sigh and looked at him with the dreamy gaze of a soul that had been wondering afar, star-led.
" Oh, Mr. Cuthbert," she whispered, "that place we came through - that white place - what was it? "
" Well now, you must mean the Avenue," said Matthew after a few moments' profound reflection. "
It is a kind of pretty place. "
"Pretty?
Oh, PRETTY doesn't seem the right word to use.
Nor beautiful, either.
They don't go far enough.
Oh, it was wonderful - wonderful.
It's the first thing I ever saw that couldn't be improved upon by imagination.
It just satisfies me here " - she put one hand on her breast - "it made a queer funny ache and yet it was a pleasant ache.
Did you ever have an ache like that, Mr. Cuthbert? "
" Well now, I just can't recollect that I ever had. "
" I have it lots of time - whenever I see anything royally beautiful.
But they shouldn't call that lovely place the Avenue.
There is no meaning in a name like that.
They should call it - let me see - the White Way of Delight.
Isn't that a nice imaginative name?
When I don't like the name of a place or a person I always imagine a new one and always think of them so.
There was a girl at the asylum whose name was Hepzibah Jenkins, but I always imagined her as Rosalia DeVere.
Other people may call that place the Avenue, but I shall always call it the White Way of Delight.
Have we really only another mile to go before we get home?
I'm glad and I'm sorry.
I'm sorry because this drive has been so pleasant and I'm always sorry when pleasant things end.
Something still pleasanter may come after, but you can never be sure.
And it's so often the case that it isn't pleasanter.
That has been my experience anyhow.
But I'm glad to think of getting home.
You see, I've never had a real home since I can remember.
It gives me that pleasant ache again just to think of coming to a really truly home.
Oh, isn't that pretty! "
They had driven over the crest of a hill.
Below them was a pond, looking almost like a river so long and winding was it.
A bridge spanned it midway and from there to its lower end, where an amber-hued belt of sand-hills shut it in from the dark blue gulf beyond, the water was a glory of many shifting hues, the most spiritual shadings of crocus and rose and ethereal green, with other elusive tintings for which no name has ever been found.
Above the bridge the pond ran up into fringing groves of fir and maple and lay all darkly translucent in their wavering shadows.
Here and there a wild plum leaned out from the bank like a white-clad girl tip-toeing to her own reflection.
From the marsh at the head of the pond came the clear, mournfully-sweet chorus of the frogs.
There was a little gray house peering around a white apple orchard on a slope beyond and, although it was not yet quite dark, a light was shining from one of its windows.
" That's Barry's pond," said Matthew.
" Oh, I don't like that name, either.
I shall call it - let me see - the Lake of Shining Waters.
Yes, that is the right name for it.
I know because of the thrill.
When I hit on a name that suits exactly it gives me a thrill.
Do things ever give you a thrill? "
Matthew ruminated.
" Well now, yes.
It always kind of gives me a thrill to see them ugly white grubs that spade up in the cucumber beds.
I hate the look of them. "
" Oh, I don't think that can be exactly the same kind of a thrill.
Do you think it can?
There doesn't seem to be much connection between grubs and lakes of shining waters, does there?
But why do other people call it Barry's pond? "
" I reckon because Mr. Barry lives up there in that house.
Orchard Slope's the name of his place.
If it wasn't for that big bush behind it you could see Green Gables from here.
But we have to go over the bridge and round by the road, so it's near half a mile further. "
"Has Mr. Barry any little girls?
Well, not so very little either - about my size. "
" He's got one about eleven.
Her name is Diana. "
" Oh! "
with a long indrawing of breath. "
What a perfectly lovely name! "
" Well now, I dunno.
There's something dreadful heathenish about it, seems to me.
I'd ruther Jane or Mary or some sensible name like that.
But when Diana was born there was a schoolmaster boarding there and they gave him the naming of her and he called her Diana. "
" I wish there had been a schoolmaster like that around when I was born, then.
Oh, here we are at the bridge.
I'm going to shut my eyes tight.
I'm always afraid going over bridges.
I can't help imagining that perhaps just as we get to the middle, they'll crumple up like a jack-knife and nip us.
So I shut my eyes.
But I always have to open them for all when I think we're getting near the middle.
Because, you see, if the bridge DID crumple up I'd want to SEE it crumple.
What a jolly rumble it makes!
I always like the rumble part of it.
Isn't it splendid there are so many things to like in this world?
There we're over.
Now I'll look back.
Good night, dear Lake of Shining Waters.
I always say good night to the things I love, just as I would to people.
I think they like it.
That water looks as if it was smiling at me. "
When they had driven up the further hill and around a corner Matthew said:
" We're pretty near home now.
That's Green Gables over - "
" Oh, don't tell me," she interrupted breathlessly, catching at his partially raised arm and shutting her eyes that she might not see his gesture. "
Let me guess.
I'm sure I'll guess right. "
She opened her eyes and looked about her.
They were on the crest of a hill.
The sun had set some time since, but the landscape was still clear in the mellow afterlight.
To the west a dark church spire rose up against a marigold sky.
Below was a little valley and beyond a long, gently-rising slope with snug farmsteads scattered along it.
From one to another the child's eyes darted, eager and wistful.
At last they lingered on one away to the left, far back from the road, dimly white with blossoming trees in the twilight of the surrounding woods.
Over it, in the stainless southwest sky, a great crystal-white star was shining like a lamp of guidance and promise.
" That's it, isn't it? "
she said, pointing.
Matthew slapped the reins on the sorrel's back delightedly.
" Well now, you've guessed it!
But I reckon Mrs. Spencer described it so's you could tell. "
" No, she didn't - really she didn't.
All she said might just as well have been about most of those other places.
I hadn't any real idea what it looked like.
But just as soon as I saw it I felt it was home.
Oh, it seems as if I must be in a dream.
Do you know, my arm must be black and blue from the elbow up, for I've pinched myself so many times today.
Every little while a horrible sickening feeling would come over me and I'd be so afraid it was all a dream.
Then I'd pinch myself to see if it was real - until suddenly I remembered that even supposing it was only a dream I'd better go on dreaming as long as I could; so I stopped pinching.
But it IS real and we're nearly home. "
Stray birds of summer come to my window to sing and fly away.
And yellow leaves of autumn, which have no songs, flutter and fall there with a sigh.