The next day when Nilovna came up to the gates of the factory with her load, the guides stopped her roughly, and ordering her to put the pails down on the ground, made a careful examination.
"My eatables will get cold," she observed calmly, as they felt around her dress.
"Shut up!"
said a guard sullenly.
Another one, tapping her lightly on the shoulder, said with assurance:
"Those books are thrown across the fence, I say!"
Old man Sizov came up to her and looking around said in an undertone:
"Did you hear, mother?"
"What?"
"About the pamphlets. They've appeared again. They've just scattered them all over like salt over bread. Much good those arrests and searches have done! My nephew Mazin has been hauled away to prison, your son's been taken. Now it's plain it isn't he!"
And stroking his beard Sizov concluded, "It's not people, but thoughts, and thoughts are not fleas; you can't catch them!"
He gathered his beard in his hand, looked at her, and said as he walked away:
"Why don't you come to see me some time?
I guess you are lonely all by yourself."
She thanked him, and calling her wares, she sharply observed the unusual animation in the factory. The workmen were all elated, they formed little circles, then parted, and ran from one group to another. Animated voices and happy, satisfied faces all around!
The soot-filled atmosphere was astir and palpitating with something bold and daring.
Now here, now there, approving ejaculations were heard, mockery, and sometimes threats.
"Aha!
It seems truth doesn't agree with them," she heard one say.
The younger men were in especially good spirits, while the elder workmen had cautious smiles on their faces. The authorities walked about with a troubled expression, and the police ran from place to place.
When the workingmen saw them, they dispersed, and walked away slowly, or if they remained standing, they stopped their conversation, looking silently at the agitated, angry faces.
The workingmen seemed for some reason to be all washed and clean. The figure of Gusev loomed high, and his brother stalked about like a drake, and roared with laughter. The joiner's foreman, Vavilov, and the record clerk, Isay, walked slowly past the mother.
The little, wizened clerk, throwing up his head and turning his neck to the left, looked at the frowning face of the foreman, and said quickly, shaking his reddish beard:
"They laugh, Ivan Ivanovich.
It's fun to them.
They are pleased, although it's no less a matter than the destruction of the government, as the manager said.
What must be done here, Ivan Ivanovich, is not merely to weed but to plow!"
Vavilov walked with his hands folded behind his back, and his fingers tightly clasped.
"You print there what you please, you blackguards!"
he cried aloud.
"But don't you dare say a word about me!"
Vasily Gusev came up to Nilovna and declared:
"I am going to eat with you again.
Is it good to-day?"
And lowering his head and screwing up his eyes, he added in an undertone: "You see?
It hit exactly!
Good!
Oh, mother, very good!"
She nodded her head affably to him, flattered that Gusev, the sauciest fellow in the village, addressed her with a respectful plural "you," as he talked to her in secret.
The general stir and animation in the factory also pleased her, and she thought to herself: "What would they do without me?"
Three common laborers stopped at a short distance from her, and one of them said with disappointment in his voice: "I couldn't find any anywhere!"
Another remarked: "I'd like to hear it, though.
I can't read myself, but I understand it hits them just in the right place."
The third man looked around him, and said: "Let's go into the boiler room.
I'll read it for you there!"
"It works!"
Gusev whispered, a wink lurking in his eye.
Nilovna came home in gay spirits.
She had now seen for herself how people are moved by books.
"The people down there are sorry they can't read," she said to Andrey, "and here am I who could when I was young, but have forgotten."
"Learn over again, then," suggested the Little Russian.
"At my age?
What do you want to make fun of me for?"
Andrey, however, took a book from the shelf and pointing with the tip of a knife at a letter on the cover, asked: "What's this?"
"R," she answered, laughing.
"And this?"
"A."
She felt awkward, hurt, and offended.
It seemed to her that Andrey's eyes were laughing at her, and she avoided their look.
But his voice sounded soft and calm in her ears.
She looked askance at his face, once, and a second time.
It was earnest and serious.
"Do you really wish to teach me to read?"
she asked with an involuntary smile.
"Why not?"
he responded.
"Try!
If you once knew how to read, it will come back to you easily.
'If no miracle it's no ill, and if a miracle better still!'"
"But they say that one does not become a saint by looking at a sacred image!"
"Eh," said the Little Russian, nodding his head. "There are proverbs galore! For example: 'The less you know, the better you sleep' &#8212; isn't that it? Proverbs are the material the stomach thinks with; it makes bridles for the soul, to be able to control it better.
What the stomach needs is a rest, and the soul needs freedom.
What letter is this?"
"M."
"Yes, see how it sprawls.
And this?"
Straining her eyes and moving her eyebrows heavily, she recalled with an effort the forgotten letters, and unconsciously yielding to the force of her exertions, she was carried away by them, and forgot herself. But soon her eyes grew tired.
At first they became moist with tears of fatigue; and then tears of sorrow rapidly dropped down on the page.
"I'm learning to read," she said, sobbing.
"It's time for me to die, and I'm just learning to read!"
"You mustn't cry," said the Little Russian gently. "It wasn't your fault you lived the way you did; and yet you understand that you lived badly. There are thousands of people who could live better than you, but who live like cattle and then boast of how well they live.
But what is good in their lives?
To-day, their day's work over, they eat, and to-morrow, their day's work over, they eat, and so on through all their years &#8212; work and eat, work and eat!
Along with this they bring forth children, and at first amuse themselves with them, but when they, too, begin to eat much, they grow surly and scold: 'Come on, you gluttons!
Hurry along!
Grow up quick!
It's time you get to work!'
and they would like to make beasts of burden of their children.
But the children begin to work for their own stomachs, and drag their lives along as a thief drags a worthless stolen mop.
Their souls are never stirred with joy, never quickened with a thought that melts the heart.
Some live like mendicants &#8212; always begging; some like thieves &#8212; always snatching out of the hands of others.
They've made thieves' laws, placed men with sticks over the people, and said to them: 'Guard our laws; they are very convenient laws; they permit us to suck the blood out of the people!'
They try to squeeze the people from the outside, but the people resist, and so they drive the rules inside so as to crush the reason, too."
Leaning his elbows on the table and looking into the mother's face with pensive eyes, he continued in an even, flowing voice:
"Only those are men who strike the chains from off man's body and from off his reason.
And now you, too, are going into this work according to the best of your ability."
"I?
Now, now!
How can I?"
"Why not?
It's just like rain.
Every drop goes to nourish the seed!
And when you are able to read, then &#8212; " He stopped and began to laugh; then rose and paced up and down the room.
"Yes, you must learn to read!
And when Pavel gets back, won't you surprise him, eh?"
"Oh, Andriusha!
For a young man everything is simple and easy!
But when you have lived to my age, you have lots of trouble, little strength, and no mind at all left."
In the evening the Little Russian went out. The mother lit a lamp and sat down at a table to knit stockings. But soon she rose again, walked irresolutely into the kitchen, bolted the outer door, and straining her eyebrows walked back into the living room.
She pulled down the window curtains, and taking a book from the shelf, sat down at the table again, looked around, bent down over the book, and began to move her lips.
When she heard a noise on the street, she started, clapped the book shut with the palm of her hand, and listened intently.
And again, now closing, now opening her eyes, she whispered:
"E &#8212; z &#8212; a."
With even precision and stern regularity the dull tick of the pendulum marked the dying seconds.
A knock at the door was heard; the mother jumped quickly to her feet, thrust the book on the shelf, and walking up to the door asked anxiously:
"Who's there?"
Rybin came in, greeted her, and stroking his beard in a dignified manner and peeping into the room with his dark eyes, remarked:
"You used to let people into your house before, without inquiring who they were.
Are you alone?"
"Yes."
"You are?
I thought the Little Russian was here.
I saw him to-day.
The prison doesn't spoil a man.
Stupidity, that's what spoils most of all."
He walked into the room, sat down and said to the mother:
"Let's have a talk together. I have something to tell you. I have a theory!" There was a significant and mysterious expression in his face as he said this. It filled the mother with a sense of foreboding.
She sat down opposite him and waited in mute anxiety for him to speak.
"Everything costs money!"
he began in his gruff, heavy voice.
"It takes money to be born; it takes money to die.
Books and leaflets cost money, too.
Now, then, do you know where all this money for the books comes from?"
"No, I don't know," replied the mother in a low voice, anticipating danger.
"Nor do I! Another question I've got to ask is: Who writes those books? The educated folks. The masters!" Rybin spoke curtly and decisively, his voice grew gruffer and gruffer, and his bearded face reddened as with the strain of exertion.
"Now, then, the masters write the books and distribute them.
But the writings in the books are against these very masters.
Now, tell me, why do they spend their money and their time to stir up the people against themselves?
Eh?"
Nilovna blinked, then opened her eyes wide and exclaimed in fright:
"What do you think?
Tell me."
"Aha!"
exclaimed Rybin, turning in his chair like a bear.
"There you are!
When I reached that thought I was seized with a cold shiver, too."
"Now what is it?
Tell me!
Did you find out anything?"
"Deception! Fraud! I feel it. It's deception. I know nothing, but I feel sure there's deception in it. Yes! The masters are up to some clever trick, and I want nothing of it. I want the truth. I understand what it is; I understand it.
But I will not go hand in hand with the masters.
They'll push me to the front when it suits them, and then walk over my bones as over a bridge to get where they want to."
At the sound of his morose words, uttered in a stubborn, thick, and forceful voice, the mother's heart contracted in pain.
"Good Lord!" she exclaimed in anguish. "Where is the truth? Can it be that Pavel does not understand? And all those who come here from the city &#8212; is it possible that they don't understand?"
The serious, honest faces of Yegor, Nikolay Ivanovich, and Sashenka passed before her mind, and her heart fluttered.
"No, no!"
she said, shaking her head as if to dismiss the thought.
"I can't believe it.
They are for truth and honor and conscience; they have no evil designs; oh, no!"
"Whom are you talking about?"
asked Rybin thoughtfully.
"About all of them!
Every single one I met.
They are not the people who will traffic in human blood, oh, no!"
Perspiration burst out on her face, and her fingers trembled.
"You are not looking in the right place, mother; look farther back," said Rybin, drooping his head. "Those who are directly working in the movement may not know anything about it themselves. They think it must be so; they have the truth at heart.
But there may be people behind them who are looking out only for their own selfish interests.
Men won't go against themselves."
And with the firm conviction of a peasant fed on centuries of distrust, he added: "No good will ever come from the masters!
Take my word for it!"
"What concoction has your brain put together?"
the mother asked, again seized with anxious misgiving.
"I?"
Rybin looked at her, was silent for a while, then repeated: "Keep away from the masters!
That's what!"
He grew morosely silent again, and seemed to shrink within himself.
"I'll go away, mother," he said after a pause. "I wanted to join the fellows, to work along with them. I'm fit for the work. I can read and write. I'm persevering and not a fool. And the main thing is, I know what to say to people.
But now I will go.
I can't believe, and therefore I must go.
I know, mother, that the people's souls are foul and besmirched.
All live on envy, all want to gorge themselves; and since there's little to eat, each seeks to eat the other up."
He let his head droop, and remained absorbed in thought for a while.
Finally he said:
"I'll go all by myself through village and hamlet and stir the people up. It's necessary that the people should take the matter in their own hands and get to work themselves. Let them but understand &#8212; they'll find a way themselves.
And so, I'm going to try to make them understand.
There is no hope for them except in themselves; there's no understanding for them except in their own understanding!
And that's the truth!"
"They will seize you!"
said the mother in a low voice.
"They will seize me, and let me out again.
And then I'll go ahead again!"
"The peasants themselves will bind you, and you will be thrown into jail."
"Well, I'll stay in jail for a time, then be released, and I'll go on again. As for the peasants, they'll bind me once, twice, and then they will understand that they ought not to bind me, but listen to me.
I'll tell them: "I don't ask you to believe me; I want you just to listen to me!"
And if they listen, they will believe."
Both the mother and Rybin spoke slowly, as if testing every word before uttering it.
"There's little joy for me in this, mother," said Rybin.
"I have lived here of late, and gobbled up a deal of stuff.
Yes; I understand some, too!
And now I feel as if I were burying a child."
"You'll perish, Mikhail Ivanych!"
said the mother, shaking her head sadly.
His dark, deep eyes looked at her with a questioning, expectant look.
His powerful body bent forward, propped by his hands resting on the seat of the chair, and his swarthy face seemed pale in the black frame of his beard.
"Did you hear what Christ said about the seed? 'Thou shalt not die, but rise to life again in the new ear.' I don't regard myself as near death at all. I am shrewd. I follow a straighter course than the others. You can get further that way.
Only, you see, I feel sorry &#8212; I don't know why."
He fidgeted on his chair, then slowly rose. "
I'll go to the tavern and be with the people a while.
The Little Russian is not coming.
Has he gotten busy already?"
"Yes!"
The mother smiled.
"No sooner out of prison than they rush to their work."
"That's the way it should be.
Tell him about me."
They walked together slowly into the kitchen, and without looking at each other exchanged brief remarks:
"I'll tell him," she promised.
"Well, good-by!"
"Good-by!
When do you quit your job?"
"I have already."
"When are you going?"
"To-morrow, early in the morning.
Good-by!"
He bent his head and crawled off the porch reluctantly, it seemed, and clumsily. The mother stood for a moment at the door listening to the heavy departing footsteps and to the doubts that stirred in her heart.
Then she noiselessly turned away into the room, and drawing the curtain peered through the window.
Black darkness stood behind, motionless, waiting, gaping, with its flat, abysmal mouth.
"I live in the night!"
she thought.
"In the night forever!"
She felt a pity for the black-bearded, sedate peasant.
He was so broad and strong &#8212; and yet there was a certain helplessness about him, as about all the people.
Presently Andrey came in gay and vivacious.
When the mother told him about Rybin, he exclaimed:
"Going, is he?
Well, let him go through the villages.
Let him ring forth the word of truth.
Let him arouse the people.
It's hard for him here with us."
"He was talking about the masters.
Is there anything in it?"
she inquired circumspectly.
"Isn't it possible that they want to deceive you?"
"It bothers you, mother, doesn't it?" The Little Russian laughed. "Oh, mother dear &#8212; money! If we only had money! We are still living on charity. Take, for instance, Nikolay Ivanych. He earns seventy-five rubles a month, and gives us fifty! And others do the same.
And the hungry students send us money sometimes, which they collect penny by penny.
And as to the masters, of course there are different kinds among them.
Some of them will deceive us, and some will leave us; but the best will stay with us and march with us up to our holiday."
He clapped his hands, and rubbing them vigorously against each other continued: "But not even the flight of an eagle's wings will enable anyone to reach that holiday, so we'll make a little one for the first of May. It will be jolly."
His words and his vivacity dispelled the alarm excited in the mother's heart by Rybin.
The Little Russian walked up and down the room, his feet sounding on the floor.
He rubbed his head with one hand and his chest with the other, and spoke looking at the floor:
"You know, sometimes you have a wonderful feeling living in your heart. It seems to you that wherever you go, all men are comrades; all burn with one and the same fire; all are merry; all are good.
Without words they all understand one another; and no one wants to hinder or insult the other.
No one feels the need of it.
All live in unison, but each heart sings its own song.
And the songs flow like brooks into one stream, swelling into a huge river of bright joys, rolling free and wide down its course.
And when you think that this will be &#8212; that it cannot help being if we so wish it &#8212; then the wonderstruck heart melts with joy.
You feel like weeping &#8212; you feel so happy."
He spoke and looked as if he were searching something within himself. The mother listened and tried not to stir, so as not to disturb him and interrupt his speech. She always listened to him with more attention than to anybody else.
He spoke more simply than all the rest, and his words gripped her heart more powerfully.
Pavel, too, was probably looking to the future.
How could it be otherwise, when one is following such a course of life?
But when he looked into the remote future it was always by himself; he never spoke of what he saw.
This Little Russian, however, it seemed to her, was always there with a part of his heart; the legend of the future holiday for all upon earth, always sounded in his speech.
This legend rendered the meaning of her son's life, of his work, and that of all of his comrades, clear to the mother.
"And when you wake up," continued the Little Russian, tossing his head and letting his hands drop alongside his body, "and look around, you see it's all filthy and cold.
All are tired and angry; human life is all churned up like mud on a busy highway, and trodden underfoot!"
He stopped in front of the mother, and with deep sorrow in his eyes, and shaking his head, added in a low, sad voice:
"Yes, it hurts, but you must &#8212; you must distrust man; you must fear him, and even hate him! Man is divided, he is cut in two by life. You'd like only to love him; but how is it possible?
How can you forgive a man if he goes against you like a wild beast, does not recognize that there is a living soul in you, and kicks your face &#8212; a human face!
You must not forgive.
It's not for yourself that you mustn't.
I'd stand all the insults as far as I myself am concerned; but I don't want to show indulgence for insults.
I don't want to let them learn on my back how to beat others!"
His eyes now sparkled with a cold gleam; he inclined his head doggedly, and continued in a more resolute tone:
"I must not forgive anything that is noxious, even though it does not hurt! I'm not alone in the world.
If I allow myself to be insulted to-day &#8212; maybe I can afford to laugh at the insult, maybe it doesn't sting me at all &#8212; but, having tested his strength on me, the offender will proceed to flay some one else the next day!
That's why one is compelled to discriminate between people, to keep a firm grip on one's heart, and to classify mankind &#8212; these belong to me, those are strangers."
The mother thought of the officer and Sashenka, and said with a sigh:
"What sort of bread can you expect from unbolted meal?"
"That's it; that's the trouble!"
the Little Russian exclaimed.
"You must look with two kinds of eyes; two hearts throb in your bosom.
The one loves all; the other says: 'Halt!
You mustn't!'"
The figure of her husband, somber and ponderous, like a huge moss-covered stone, now rose in her memory.
She made a mental image for herself of the Little Russian as married to Natasha, and her son as the husband of Sashenka.
"And why?" asked the Little Russian, warming up. "It's so plainly evident that it's downright ridiculous &#8212; simply because men don't stand on an equal footing. Then let's equalize them, put them all in one row!
Let's divide equally all that's produced by the brains and all that's made by the hands.
Let's not keep one another in the slavery of fear and envy, in the thraldom of greed and stupidity!"
The mother and the Little Russian now began to carry on such conversations with each other frequently. He was again taken into the factory. He turned over all his earnings to the mother, and she took the money from him with as little fuss as from Pavel.
Sometimes Andrey would suggest with a twinkle in his eyes:
"Shall we read a little, mother, eh?"
She would invariably refuse, playfully but resolutely.
The twinkle in his eyes discomfited her, and she thought to herself, with a slight feeling of offense: "If you laugh at me, then why do you ask me to read with you?"
He noticed that the mother began to ask him with increasing frequency for the meaning of this or that book word. She always looked aside when asking for such information, and spoke in a monotonous tone of indifference.
He divined that she was studying by herself in secret, understood her bashfulness, and ceased to invite her to read with him.
Shortly afterwards she said to him:
"My eyes are getting weak, Andriusha.
I guess I need glasses."
"All right!
Next Sunday I'll take you to a physician in the city, a friend of mine, and you shall have glasses!"
She had already been three times in the prison to ask for a meeting with Pavel, and each time the general of the gendarmes, a gray old man with purple cheeks and a huge nose, turned her gently away.
"In about a week, little mother, not before!
A week from now we shall see, but at present it's impossible!"
He was a round, well-fed creature, and somehow reminded her of a ripe plum, somewhat spoiled by too long keeping, and already covered with a downy mold. He kept constantly picking his small, white teeth with a sharp yellow toothpick.
There was a little smile in his small greenish eyes, and his voice had a friendly, caressing sound.
"Polite!"
said the mother to the Little Russian with a thoughtful air.
"Always with a smile on him.
I don't think it's right.
When a man is tending to affairs like these, I don't think he ought to grin."
"Yes, yes.
They are so gentle, always smiling.
If they should be told: 'Look here, this man is honest and wise, he is dangerous to us; hang him!'
they would still smile and hang him, and keep on smiling."
"The one who made the search in our place is the better of the two; he is simpler.
You can see at once that he is a dog."
"None of them are human beings; they are used to stun the people and render them insensible. They are tools, the means wherewith our kind is rendered more convenient to the state.
They themselves have already been so fixed that they have become convenient instruments in the hand that governs us.
They can do whatever they are told to do without thought, without asking why it is necessary to do it."
At last Vlasova got permission to see her son, and one Sunday she was sitting modestly in a corner of the prison office, a low, narrow, dingy apartment, where a few more people were sitting and waiting for permission to see their relatives and friends.
Evidently it was not the first time they were here, for they knew one another and in a low voice kept up a lazy, languid conversation.
"Have you heard?"
said a stout woman with a wizened face and a traveling bag on her lap.
"At early mass to-day the church regent again ripped up the ear of one of the choir boys."
An elderly man in the uniform of a retired soldier coughed aloud and remarked:
"These choir boys are such loafers!"
A short, bald, little man with short legs, long arms, and protruding jaw, ran officiously up and down the room.
Without stopping he said in a cracked, agitated voice:
"The cost of living is getting higher and higher.
An inferior quality of beef, fourteen cents; bread has again risen to two and a half."
Now and then prisoners came into the room &#8212; gray, monotonous, with coarse, heavy, leather shoes. They blinked as they entered; iron chains rattled at the feet of one of them. The quiet and calm and simplicity all around produced a strange, uncouth impression.
It seemed as if all had grown accustomed to their situation.
Some sat there quietly, others looked on idly, while still others seemed to pay their regular visits with a sense of weariness.
The mother's heart quivered with impatience, and she looked with a puzzled air at everything around her, amazed at the oppressive simplicity of life in this corner of the world.
"The mother's heart quivered with impatience."
Next to Vlasova sat a little old woman with a wrinkled face, but youthful eyes.
She kept her thin neck turned to listen to the conversation, and looked about on all sides with a strange expression of eagerness in her face.
"Whom have you here?"
Vlasova asked softly.
"A son, a student," answered the old woman in a loud, brusque voice.
"And you?"
"A son, also.
A workingman."
"What's the name?"
"Vlasov."
"Never heard of him.
How long has he been in prison?"
"Seven weeks."
"And mine has been in for ten months," said the old woman, with a strange note of pride in her voice which did not escape the notice of the mother.
A tall lady dressed in black, with a thin, pale face, said lingeringly:
"They'll soon put all the decent people in prison.
They can't endure them, they loathe them!"
"Yes, yes!"
said the little old bald man, speaking rapidly.
"All patience is disappearing.
Everybody is excited; everybody is clamoring, and prices are mounting higher and higher.
As a consequence the value of men is depreciating.
And there is not a single, conciliatory voice heard, not one!"
"Perfectly true!"
said the retired military man.
"It's monstrous!
What's wanted is a voice, a firm voice to cry, 'Silence!'
Yes, that's what we want &#8212; a firm voice!"
The conversation became more general and animated. Everybody was in a hurry to give his opinion about life; but all spoke in a half-subdued voice, and the mother noticed a tone of hostility in all, which was new to her.
At home they spoke differently, more intelligibly, more simply, and more loudly.
The fat warden with a square red beard called out her name, looked her over from head to foot, and telling her to follow him, walked off limping. She followed him, and felt like pushing him to make him go faster.
Pavel stood in a small room, and on seeing his mother smiled and put out his hand to her.
She grasped it, laughed, blinked swiftly, and at a loss for words merely asked softly:
"How are you?
How are you?"
"Compose yourself, mother."
Pavel pressed her hand.
"It's all right!
It's all right!"
"Mother," said the warden, fetching a sigh, "suppose you move away from each other a bit.
Let there be some distance between you."
He yawned aloud.
Pavel asked the mother about her health and about home.
She waited for some other questions, sought them in her son's eyes, but could not find them.
He was calm as usual, although his face had grown paler, and his eyes seemed larger.
"Sasha sends you her regards," she said.
Pavel's eyelids quivered and fell.
His face became softer and brightened with a clear, open smile.
A poignant bitterness smote the mother's heart.
"Will they let you out soon?"
she inquired in a tone of sudden injury and agitation.
"Why have they put you in prison?
Those papers and pamphlets have appeared in the factory again, anyway."
Pavel's eyes flashed with delight.
"Have they?
When?
Many of them?"
"It is forbidden to talk about this subject!"
the warden lazily announced.
"You may talk only of family matters."
"And isn't this a family matter?"
retorted the mother.
"I don't know.
I only know it's forbidden.
You may talk about his wash and underwear and food, but nothing else!"
insisted the warden, his voice, however, expressing utter indifference.
"All right," said Pavel.
"Keep to domestic affairs, mother.
What are you doing?"
She answered boldly, seized with youthful ardor:
"I carry all this to the factory."
She paused with a smile and continued: "Sour soup, gruel, all Marya's cookery, and other stuff."
Pavel understood.
The muscles of his face quivered with restrained laughter.
He ran his fingers through his hair and said in a tender tone, such as she had never heard him use:
"My own dear mother!
That's good!
It's good you've found something to do, so it isn't tedious for you.
You don't feel lonesome, do you, mother?"
"When the leaflets appeared, they searched me, too," she said, not without a certain pride.
"Again on this subject!"
said the warden in an offended tone.
"I tell you it's forbidden, it's not allowed.
They have deprived him of liberty so that he shouldn't know anything about it; and here you are with your news.
You ought to know it's forbidden!"
"Well, leave it, mother," said Pavel. "Matvey Ivanovich is a good man. You mustn't do anything to provoke him. We get along together very well. It's by chance he's here to-day with us. Usually, it's the assistant superintendent who is present on such occasions.
That's why Matvey Ivanovich is afraid you will say something you oughtn't to."
"Time's up!"
announced the warden looking at his watch.
"Take your leave!"
"Well, thank you," said Pavel.
"Thank you, my darling mother!
Don't worry now.
They'll let me out soon."
He embraced her, pressed her warmly to his bosom, and kissed her.
Touched by his endearments, and happy, she burst into tears.
"Now separate!"
said the warden, and as he walked off with the mother he mumbled:
"Don't cry!
They'll let him out; they'll let everybody out.
It's too crowded here."
At home the mother told the Little Russian of her conversation with Pavel, and her face wore a broad smile.
"I told him!
Yes, indeed!
And cleverly, too.
He understood!"
and, heaving a melancholy sigh: "Oh, yes, he understood; otherwise he wouldn't have been so tender and affectionate.
He has never been that way before."
"Oh, mother!"
the Little Russian laughed.
"No matter what other people may want, a mother always wants affection.
You certainly have a heart plenty big enough for one man!"
"But those people! Just think, Andriusha!" she suddenly exclaimed, amazement in her tone. "How used they get to all this! Their children are taken away from them, are thrown into dungeons, and, mind you, it's as nothing to them! They come, sit about, wait, and talk.
What do you think of that?
If intelligent people are that way, if they can so easily get accustomed to a thing like that, then what's to be said about the common people?"
"That's natural," said the Little Russian with his usual smile. "The law after all is not so harsh toward them as toward us. And they need the law more than we do.
So that when the law hits them on the head, although they cry out they do not cry very loud.
Your own stick does not fall upon you so heavily.
For them the laws are to some extent a protection, but for us they are only chains to keep us bound so we can't kick."
Three days afterwards in the evening, when the mother sat at the table knitting stockings and the Little Russian was reading to her from a book about the revolt of the Roman slaves, a loud knock was heard at the door.
The Little Russian went to open it and admitted Vyesovshchikov with a bundle under his arm, his hat pushed back on his head, and mud up to his knees.
"I was passing by, and seeing a light in your house, I dropped in to ask you how you are.
I've come straight from the prison."
He spoke in a strange voice.
He seized Vlasov's hand and wrung it violently as he added: "Pavel sends you his regards."
Irresolutely seating himself in a chair he scanned the room with his gloomy, suspicious look.
The mother was not fond of him.
There was something in his angular, close-cropped head and in his small eyes that always scared her; but now she was glad to see him, and with a broad smile lighting her face she said in a tender, animated voice:
"How thin you've become!
Say, Andriusha, let's dose him with tea."
"I'm putting up the samovar already!"
the Little Russian called from the kitchen.
"How is Pavel?
Have they let anybody else out besides yourself?"
Nikolay bent his head and answered:
"I'm the only one they've let go."
He raised his eyes to the mother's face and said slowly, speaking through his teeth with ponderous emphasis: "I told them: 'Enough!
Let me go!
Else I'll kill some one here, and myself, too!'
So they let me go!"
"Hm, hm &#8212; ye-es," said the mother, recoiling from him and involuntarily blinking when her gaze met his sharp, narrow eyes.
"And how is Fedya Mazin?"
shouted the Little Russian from the kitchen.
"Writing poetry, is he?"
"Yes!
I don't understand it," said Nikolay, shaking his head.
"They've put him in a cage and he sings.
There's only one thing I'm sure about, and that is I have no desire to go home."
"Why should you want to go home?
What's there to attract you?"
said the mother pensively.
"It's empty, there's no fire burning, and it's chilly all over."
Vyesovshchikov sat silent, his eyes screwed up.
Taking a box of cigarettes from his pocket he leisurely lit one of them, and looking at the gray curl of smoke dissolve before him he grinned like a big, surly dog.
"Yes, I guess it's cold.
And the floor is filled with frozen cockroaches, and even the mice are frozen, too, I suppose.
Pelagueya Nilovna, will you let me sleep here to-night, please?"
he asked hoarsely without looking at her.
"Why, of course, Nikolay!
You needn't even ask it!"
the mother quickly replied.
She felt embarrassed and ill at ease in Nikolay's presence, and did not know what to speak to him about.
But he himself went on to talk in a strangely broken voice.
"We live in a time when children are ashamed of their own parents."
"What!"
exclaimed the mother, starting.
He glanced up at her and closed his eyes.
His pockmarked face looked like that of a blind man.
"I say that children have to be ashamed of their parents," he repeated, sighing aloud. "Now, don't you be afraid. It's not meant for you. Pavel will never be ashamed of you. But I am ashamed of my father, and shall never enter his house again.
I have no father, no home!
They have put me under the surveillance of the police, else I'd go to Siberia.
I think a man who won't spare himself could do a great deal in Siberia.
I would free convicts there and arrange for their escape."
The mother understood, with her ready feelings, what agony this man must be undergoing, but his pain awoke no sympathetic response in her.
"Well, of course, if that's the case, then it's better for you to go," she said, in order not to offend him by silence.
Andrey came in from the kitchen, and said, smiling:
"Well, are you sermonizing, eh?"
The mother rose and walked away, saying:
"I'm going to get something to eat."
Vyesovshchikov looked at the Little Russian fixedly and suddenly declared:
"I think that some people ought to be killed off!"
"Oho!
And pray what for?"
asked the Little Russian calmly.
"So they cease to be."
"Ahem!
And have you the right to make corpses out of living people?"
"Yes, I have."
"Where did you get it from?"
"The people themselves gave it to me."
The Little Russian stood in the middle of the room, tall and spare, swaying on his legs, with his hands thrust in his pockets, and looked down on Nikolay.
Nikolay sat firmly in his chair, enveloped in clouds of smoke, with red spots on his face showing through.
"The people gave it to me!" he repeated clenching his fist. "If they kick me I have the right to strike them and punch their eyes out! Don't touch me, and I won't touch you! Let me live as I please, and I'll live in peace and not touch anybody.
Maybe I'd prefer to live in the woods.
I'd build myself a cabin in the ravine by the brook and live there.
At any rate, I'd live alone."
"Well, go and live that way, if it pleases you," said the Little Russian, shrugging his shoulders.
"Now?"
asked Nikolay.
He shook his head in negation and replied, striking his fist on his knee:
"Now it's impossible!"
"Who's in your way?"
"The people!" Vyesovshchikov retorted brusquely. "I'm hitched to them even unto death. They've hedged my heart around with hatred and tied me to themselves with evil. That's a strong tie! I hate them, and I will not go away; no, never! I'll be in their way. I'll harass their lives.
They are in my way, I'll be in theirs.
I'll answer only for myself, only for myself, and for no one else.
And if my father is a thief &#8212; "
"Oh!"
said the Little Russian in a low voice, moving up to Nikolay.
"And as for Isay Gorbov, I'll wring his head off!
You shall see!"
"What for?"
asked the Little Russian in a quiet, earnest voice.
"He shouldn't be a spy; he shouldn't go about denouncing people.
It's through him my father's gone to the dogs, and it's owing to him that he now is aiming to become a spy," said Vyesovshchikov, looking at Andrey with a dark, hostile scowl.
"Oh, that's it!"
exclaimed the Little Russian.
"And pray, who'd blame you for that?
Fools!"
"Both the fools and the wise are smeared with the same oil!" said Nikolay heavily. "Here are you a wise fellow, and Pavel, too. And do you mean to say that I am the same to you as Fedya Mazin or Samoylov, or as you two are to each other?
Don't lie!
I won't believe you, anyway.
You all push me aside to a place apart, all by myself."
"Your heart is aching, Nikolay!"
said the Little Russian softly and tenderly sitting down beside him.
"Yes, it's aching, and so is your heart.
But your aches seem nobler to you than mine.
We are all scoundrels toward one another, that's what I say.
And what have you to say to that?"
He fixed his sharp gaze on Andrey, and waited with set teeth.
His mottled face remained immobile, and a quiver passed over his thick lips, as if scorched by a flame.
"I have nothing to say!" said the Little Russian, meeting Vyesovshchikov's hostile glance with a bright, warm, yet melancholy look of his blue eyes. "I know that to argue with a man at a time when all the wounds of his heart are bleeding, is only to insult him.
I know it, brother."
"It's impossible to argue with me; I can't," mumbled Nikolay, lowering his eyes.
"I think," continued the Little Russian, "that each of us has gone through that, each of us has walked with bare feet over broken glass, each of us in his dark hour has gasped for breath as you are now."
"You have nothing to tell me!"
said Vyesovshchikov slowly.
"Nothing!
My heart is so &#8212; it seems to me as if wolves were howling there!"
"And I don't want to say anything to you. Only I know that you'll get over this, perhaps not entirely, but you'll get over it!" He smiled, and added, tapping Nikolay on the back: "Why, man, this is a children's disease, something like measles!
We all suffer from it, the strong less, the weak more.
It comes upon a man at the period when he has found himself, but does not yet understand life, and his own place in life.
And when you do not see your place, and are unable to appraise your own value, it seems that you are the only, the inimitable cucumber on the face of the earth, and that no one can measure, no one can fathom your worth, and that all are eager only to eat you up.
After a while you'll find out that the hearts in other people's breasts are no worse than a good part of your own heart, and you'll begin to feel better.
And somewhat ashamed, too!
Why should you climb up to the belfry tower, when your bell is so small that it can't be heard in the great peal of the holiday bells?
Moreover, you'll see that in chorus the sound of your bell will be heard, too, but by itself the old church bells will drown it in their rumble as a fly is drowned in oil.
Do you understand what I am saying?"
"Maybe I understand," Nikolay said, nodding his head.
"Only I don't believe it."
The Little Russian broke into a laugh, jumped to his feet, and began to run noisily up and down the room.
"I didn't believe it either.
Ah, you &#8212; wagonload!"
"Why a wagonload?"
Nikolay asked with a sad smile, looking at the Little Russian.
"Because there's a resemblance!"
Suddenly Nikolay broke into a loud guffaw, his mouth opening wide.
"What is it?"
the Little Russian asked in surprise, stopping in front of him.
"It struck me that he'd be a fool who'd want to insult you!"
Nikolay declared, shaking his head.
"Why, how can you insult me?"
asked the Little Russian, shrugging his shoulders.
"I don't know," said Vyesovshchikov, grinning good-naturedly or perhaps condescendingly.
"I only wanted to say that a man must feel mighty ashamed of himself after he'd insulted you."
"There now!
See where you got to!"
laughed the Little Russian.
"Andriusha!"
the mother called from the kitchen.
"Come get the samovar.
It's ready!"
Andrey walked out of the room, and Vyesovshchikov, left alone, looked about, stretched out his foot sheathed in a coarse, heavy boot, looked at it, bent down, and felt the stout calf of his legs.
Then he raised one hand to his face, carefully examined the palm, and turned it around.
His short-fingered hand was thick, and covered with yellowish hair.
He waved it in the air, and arose.
When Andrey brought in the samovar, Vyesovshchikov was standing before the mirror, and greeted him with these words:
"It's a long time since I've seen my face."
Then he laughed and added: "It's an ugly face I have!"
"What's that to you?"
asked Andrey, turning a curious look upon him.
"Sashenka says the face is the mirror of the heart!"
Nikolay replied, bringing out the words slowly.
"It's not true, though!"
the little Russian ejaculated.
"She has a nose like a mushroom, cheek bones like a pair of scissors; yet her heart is like a bright little star."
They sat down to drink tea.
Vyesovshchikov took a big potato, heavily salted a slice of bread, and began to chew slowly and deliberately, like an ox.
"And how are matters here?"
he asked, with his mouth full.
When Andrey cheerfully recounted to him the growth of the socialist propaganda in the factory, he again grew morose and remarked dully:
"It takes too long!
Too long, entirely!
It ought to go faster!"
The mother regarded him, and was seized with a feeling of hostility toward this man.
"Life is not a horse; you can't set it galloping with a whip," said Andrey.
But Vyesovshchikov stubbornly shook his head, and proceeded:
"It's slow!
I haven't the patience.
What am I to do?"
He opened his arms in a gesture of helplessness, and waited for a response.
"We all must learn and teach others.
That's our business!"
said Andrey, bending his head.
Vyesovshchikov asked:
"And when are we going to fight?"
"There'll be more than one butchery of us up to that time, that I know!" answered the Little Russian with a smile. "But when we shall be called on to fight, that I don't know! First, you see, we must equip the head, and then the hand.
That's what I think."
"The heart!"
said Nikolay laconically.
"And the heart, too."
Nikolay became silent, and began to eat again. From the corner of her eye the mother stealthily regarded his broad, pockmarked face, endeavoring to find something in it to reconcile her to the unwieldy, square figure of Vyesovshchikov.
Her eyebrows fluttered whenever she encountered the shooting glance of his little eyes.
Andrey held his head in his hands; he became restless &#8212; he suddenly laughed, and then abruptly stopped, and began to whistle.
It seemed to the mother that she understood his disquietude.
Nikolay sat at the table without saying anything; and when the Little Russian addressed a question to him, he answered briefly, with evident reluctance.
The little room became too narrow and stifling for its two occupants, and they glanced, now the one, now the other, at their guest.
At length Nikolay rose and said: "I'd like to go to bed.
I sat and sat in prison &#8212; suddenly they let me go; I'm off!
&#8212; I'm tired!"
He went into the kitchen and stirred about for a while.
Then a sudden stillness settled down.
The mother listened for a sound, and whispered to Andrey: "He has something terrible in his mind!"
"Yes, he's hard to understand!"
the Little Russian assented, shaking his head.
"But you go to bed, mother, I am going to stay and read a while."
She went to the corner where the bed was hidden from view by chintz curtains. Andrey, sitting at the table, for a long while listened to the warm murmur of her prayers and sighs.
Quickly turning the pages of the book Andrey nervously rubbed his lips, twitched his mustache with his long fingers, and scraped his feet on the floor.
Ticktock, ticktock went the pendulum of the clock; and the wind moaned as it swept past the window.
Then the mother's low voice was heard:
"Oh, God!
How many people there are in the world, and each one wails in his own way.
Where, then, are those who feel rejoiced?"
"Soon there will be such, too, soon!"
announced the Little Russian.
Life flowed on swiftly. The days were diversified and full of color. Each one brought with it something new, and the new ceased to alarm the mother.
Strangers came to the house in the evening more and more frequently, and they talked with Andrey in subdued voices with an engrossed air.
Late at night they went out into the darkness, their collars up, their hats thrust low over their faces, noiselessly, cautiously.
All seemed to feel a feverish excitement, which they kept under restraint, and had the air of wanting to sing and laugh if they only had the time.
They were all in a perpetual hurry.
All of them &#8212; the mocking and the serious, the frank, jovial youth with effervescing strength, the thoughtful and quiet &#8212; all of them in the eyes of the mother were identical in the persistent faith that characterized them; and although each had his own peculiar cast of countenance, for her all their faces blended into one thin, composed, resolute face with a profound expression in its dark eyes, kind yet stern, like the look in Christ's eyes on his way to Emmaus.
The mother counted them, and mentally gathered them together into a group around Pavel.
In that throng he became invisible to the eyes of the enemy.
One day a vivacious, curly-haired girl appeared from the city, bringing some parcel for Andrey; and on leaving she said to Vlasova, with a gleam in her merry eyes:
"Good-by, comrade!"
"Good-by!" the mother answered, restraining a smile.
After seeing the girl to the door, she walked to the window and, smiling, looked out on the street to watch her comrade as she trotted away, nimbly raising and dropping her little feet, fresh as a spring flower and light as a butterfly.
"Comrade!"
said the mother when her guest had disappeared from her view.
"Oh, you dear!
God grant you a comrade for all your life!"
She often noticed in all the people from the city a certain childishness, for which she had the indulgent smile of an elderly person; but at the same time she was touched and joyously surprised by their faith, the profundity of which she began to realize more and more clearly.
Their visions of the triumph of justice captivated her and warmed her heart.
As she listened to their recital of future victories, she involuntarily sighed with an unknown sorrow.
But what touched her above all was their simplicity, their beautiful, grand, generous unconcern for themselves.
She had already come to understand a great deal of what was said about life. She felt they had in reality discovered the true source of the people's misfortune, and it became a habit with her to agree with their thoughts.
But at the bottom of her heart she did not believe that they could remake the whole of life according to their idea, or that they would have strength enough to gather all the working people about their fire.
Everyone, she knew, wants to fill his stomach to-day, and no one wants to put his dinner off even for a week, if he can eat it up at once.
Not many would consent to travel the long and difficult road; and not all eyes could see at the end the promised kingdom where all men are brothers.
That's why all these good people, despite their beards and worn faces, seemed to her mere children.
"My dear ones!"
she thought, shaking her head.
But they all now lived a good, earnest, and sensible life; they all spoke of the common weal; and in their desire to teach other people what they knew, they did not spare themselves.
She understood that it was possible to love such a life, despite its dangers; and with a sigh she looked back to bygone days in which her past dragged along flatly and monotonously, a thin, black thread.
Imperceptibly she grew conscious of her usefulness in this new life &#8212; a consciousness that gave her poise and assurance.
She had never before felt herself necessary to anybody.
When she had lived with her husband, she knew that if she died he would marry another woman.
It was all the same to him whether a dark-haired or a red-haired woman lived with him and prepared his meals.
When Pavel grew up and began to run about in the street, she saw that she was not needed by him.
But now she felt that she was helping a good work.
It was new to her and pleasant.
It set her head erect on her shoulders.
She considered it her duty to carry the books regularly to the factory. Indeed, she elaborated a number of devices for escaping detection. The spies, grown accustomed to her presence on the factory premises, ceased to pay attention to her.
She was searched several times, but always the day after the appearance of the leaflets in the factory.
When she had no literature about her, she knew how to arouse the suspicion of the guards and spies.
They would halt her, and she would pretend to feel insulted, and would remonstrate with them, and then walk off blushing, proud of her clever ruse.
She began to enjoy the fun of the game.
Vyesovshchikov was not taken back to the factory, and went to work for a lumberman. The whole day long he drove about the village with a pair of black horses pulling planks and beams after them.
The mother saw him almost daily with the horses as they plodded along the road, their feet trembling under the strain and dropping heavily upon the ground.
They were both old and bare-boned, their heads shook wearily and sadly, and their dull, jaded eyes blinked heavily.
Behind them jerkingly trailed a long beam, or a pile of boards clattering loudly.
And by their side Nikolay trudged along, holding the slackened reins in his hand, ragged, dirty, with heavy boots, his hat thrust back, uncouth as a stump just turned up from the ground.
He, too, shook his head and looked down at his feet, refusing to see anything.
His horses blindly ran into the people and wagons going the opposite direction.
Angry oaths buzzed about him like hornets, and sinister shouts rent the air.
He did not raise his head, did not answer them, but went on, whistling a sharp, shrill whistle, mumbling dully to the horses.
Every time that Andrey's comrades gathered at the mother's house to read pamphlets or the new issue of the foreign papers, Nikolay came also, sat down in a corner, and listened in silence for an hour or two.
When the reading was over the young people entered into long discussions; but Vyesovshchikov took no part in the arguments.
He remained longer than the rest, and when alone, face to face with Andrey, he glumly put to him the question:
"And who is the most to blame?
The Czar?"
"The one to blame is he who first said: 'This is mine.'
That man has now been dead some several thousand years, and it's not worth the while to bear him a grudge," said the Little Russian, jesting.
His eyes, however, had a perturbed expression.
"And how about the rich, and those who stand up for them?
Are they right?"
The Little Russian clapped his hands to his head; then pulled his mustache, and spoke for a long time in simple language about life and about the people. But from his talk it always appeared as if all the people were to blame, and this did not satisfy Nikolay.
Compressing his thick lips tightly, he shook his head in demur, and declared that he could not believe it was so, and that he did not understand it.
He left dissatisfied and gloomy.
Once he said:
"No, there must be people to blame!
I'm sure there are!
I tell you, we must plow over the whole of life like a weedy field, showing no mercy!"
"That's what Isay, the record clerk, once said about us!"
the mother said.
For a while the two were silent.
"Isay?"
"Yes, he's a bad man.
He spies after everybody, fishes about everywhere for information.
He has begun to frequent this street, and peers into our windows."
"Peers into your windows?"
The mother was already in bed and did not see his face.
But she understood that she had said too much, because the Little Russian hastened to interpose in order to conciliate Nikolay.
"Let him peer!
He has leisure.
That's his way of killing time."
"No hold on!"
said Nikolay. "
There!
He is to blame!"
"To blame for what?"
the Little Russian asked brusquely.
"Because he's a fool?"
But Vyesovshchikov did not stop to answer and walked away.
The Little Russian began to pace up and down the room, slowly and languidly.
He had taken off his boots as he always did when the mother was in bed in order not to disturb her.
But she was not asleep, and when Nikolay had left she said anxiously:
"I'm so afraid of that man.
He's just like an overheated oven.
He does not warm things, but scorches them."
"Yes, yes!"
the Little Russian drawled.
"He's an irascible boy.
I wouldn't talk to him about Isay, mother.
That fellow Isay is really spying and getting paid for it, too."
"What's so strange in that?
His godfather is a gendarme," observed the mother.
"Well, Nikolay will give him a dressing. What of it?" the Little Russian continued uneasily. "See what hard feelings the rulers of our life have produced in the rank and file? When such people as Nikolay come to recognize their wrong and lose their patience, what will happen then?
The sky will be sprinkled with blood, and the earth will froth and foam with it like the suds of soap water."
"It's terrible, Andriusha!"
the mother exclaimed in a low voice.
"They have swallowed flies, and have to vomit them now!"
said Andrey after a pause.
"And after all, mother, every drop of their blood that may be shed will have been washed in seas of the people's tears."
Suddenly he broke into a low laugh and added:
"That's true; but it's no comfort!"
Once on a holiday the mother, on returning home from a store, opened the door of the porch, and remained fixed to the spot, suddenly bathed in the sunshine of joy.
From the room she heard the sound of Pavel's voice.
"There she is!"
cried the Little Russian.
The mother saw Pavel turn about quickly, and saw how his face lighted up with a feeling that held out the promise of something great to her.
"There you are &#8212; come home!"
she mumbled, staggered by the unexpectedness of the event.
She sat down.
He bent down to her with a pale face, little tears glistened brightly in the corners of his eyes, and his lips trembled.
For a moment he was silent.
The mother looked at him, and was silent also.
The Little Russian, whistling softly, passed by them with bent head and walked out into the yard.
"Thank you, mother," said Pavel in a deep, low voice, pressing her hand with his trembling fingers.
"Thank you, my dear, my own mother!"
Rejoiced at the agitated expression of her son's face and the touching sound of his voice, she stroked his hair and tried to restrain the palpitation of her heart.
She murmured softly:
"Christ be with you!
What have I done for you?
It isn't I who have made you what you are.
It's you yourself &#8212; "
"Thank you for helping our great cause!"
he said.
"When a man can call his mother his own in spirit also &#8212; that's rare fortune!"
She said nothing, and greedily swallowed his words.
She admired her son as he stood before her so radiant and so near.
"I was silent, mother dear. I saw that many things in my life hurt you. I was sorry for you, and yet I could not help it. I was powerless!
I thought you could never get reconciled to us, that you could never adopt our ideas as yours, but that you would suffer in silence as you had suffered all your life long.
It was hard."
"Andriusha made me understand many things!"
she declared, in her desire to turn her son's attention to his comrade.
"Yes, he told me about you," said Pavel, laughing.
"And Yegor, too!
He is a countryman of mine, you know.
Andriusha wanted to teach me to read, also."
"And you got offended, and began to study by yourself in secret."
"Oh, so he found me out!"
she exclaimed in embarrassment.
Then troubled by this abundance of joy which filled her heart she again suggested to Pavel:
"Shan't we call him in?
He went out on purpose, so as not to disturb us.
He has no mother."
"Andrey!"
shouted Pavel, opening the door to the porch.
"Where are you?"
"Here.
I want to chop some wood."
"Never mind!
There's time enough!
Come here!"
"All right!
I'm coming!"
But he did not come at once; and on entering the kitchen he said in a housekeeper-like fashion:
"We must tell Nikolay to bring us wood.
We have very little wood left.
You see, mother, how well Pavel looks?
Instead of punishing the rebels, the government only fattens them."
The mother laughed. Her heart was still leaping with joy. She was fairly intoxicated with happiness. But a certain, cautious, chary feeling already called forth in her the wish to see her son calm as he always was.
She wanted this first joy in her life to remain fixed in her heart forever as live and strong as at first.
In order to guard against the diminution of her happiness, she hastened to hide it, as a fowler secrets some rare bird that has happened to fall into his hands.
"Let's have dinner!
Pasha, haven't you had anything to eat yet?"
she asked with anxious haste.
"No.
I learned yesterday from the warden that I was to be released, and I couldn't eat or drink anything to-day."
"The first person I met here was Sizov," Pavel communicated to Andrey. "He caught sight of me and crossed the street to greet me. I told him that he ought to be more careful now, as I was a dangerous man under the surveillance of the police.
But he said: 'Never mind!'
and you ought to have heard him inquire about his nephew! '
Did Fedor conduct himself properly in prison?'
I wanted to know what is meant by proper behavior in prison, and he declared: 'Well, did he blab anything he shouldn't have against his comrades?'
And when I told him that Fedya was an honest and wise young man, he stroked his beard and declared proudly: 'We, the Sizovs, have no trash in our family.'"
"He's a brainy old man!"
said the Little Russian, nodding his head.
"We often have talks with him.
He's a fine peasant.
Will they let Fedya out soon?"
"Yes, one of these days, I suppose.
They'll let out all, I think.
They have no evidence except Isay's, and what can he say?"
The mother walked up and down the room, and looked at her son. Andrey stood at the window with his hands clasped behind his back, listening to Pavel's narrative. Pavel also paced up and down the room.
His beard had grown, and small ringlets of thin, dark hair curled in a dense growth around his cheeks, softening the swarthy color of his face.
His dark eyes had their stern expression.
"Sit down!"
said the mother, serving a hot dish.
At dinner Andrey told Pavel about Rybin.
When he had concluded Pavel exclaimed regretfully:
"If I had been home, I would not have let him go that way.
What did he take along with him?
A feeling of discontent and a muddle in his head!"
"Well," said Andrey, laughing, "when a man's grown to the age of forty and has fought so long with the bears in his heart, it's hard to make him over."
Pavel looked at him sternly and asked:
"Do you think it's impossible for enlightenment to destroy all the rubbish that's been crammed into a man's brains?"
"Don't fly up into the air at once, Pavel!
Your flight will knock you up against the belfry tower and break your wings," said the Little Russian in admonition.
And they started one of those discussions in which words were used that were unintelligible to the mother.
The dinner was already at an end, but they still continued a vehement debate, flinging at each other veritable rattling hailstones of big words.
Sometimes their language was simpler:
"We must keep straight on our path, turning neither to the right nor to the left!"
Pavel asserted firmly.
"And run headlong into millions of people who will regard us as their enemies!"
"You can't avoid that!"
"And what, my dear sir, becomes of your enlightenment?"
The mother listened to the dispute, and understood that Pavel did not care for the peasants, but that the Little Russian stood up for them, and tried to show that the peasants, too, must be taught to comprehend the good.
She understood Andrey better, and he seemed to her to be in the right; but every time he spoke she waited with strained ears and bated breath for her son's answer to find out whether the Little Russian had offended Pavel.
But although they shouted at the top of their voices, they gave each other no offense.
Occasionally the mother asked:
"Is it so, Pavel?"
And he answered with a smile:
"Yes, it's so."
"Say, my dear sir," the Little Russian said with a good-natured sneer, "you have eaten well, but you have chewed your food up badly, and a piece has remained sticking in your throat.
You had better gargle."
"Don't go fooling now!"
said Pavel.
"I am as solemn as a funeral."
The mother laughed quietly and shook her head.
Spring was rapidly drawing near; the snow melted and laid bare the mud and the soot of the factory chimneys. Mud, mud! Wherever the villagers looked &#8212; mud! Every day more mud! The entire village seemed unwashed and dressed in rags and tatters.
During the day the water dripped monotonously from the roofs, and damp, weary exhalations emanated from the gray walls of the houses.
Toward night whitish icicles glistened everywhere in dim outline.
The sun appeared in the heavens more frequently, and the brooks began to murmur hesitatingly on their way to the marsh.
At noon the throbbing song of spring hopes hung tremblingly and caressingly over the village.
They were preparing to celebrate the first of May.
Leaflets appeared in the factory explaining the significance of this holiday, and even the young men not affected by the propaganda said, as they read them:
"Yes, we must arrange a holiday!"
Vyesovshchikov exclaimed with a sullen grin:
"It's time!
Time we stopped playing hide and seek!"
Fedya Mazin was in high spirits.
He had grown very thin.
With his nervous, jerky gestures, and the trepidation in his speech, he was like a caged lark.
He was always with Yakob Somov, taciturn and serious beyond his years.
Samoylov, who had grown still redder in prison, Vasily Gusev, curly-haired Dragunov, and a number of others argued that it was necessary to come out armed, but Pavel and the Little Russian, Somov, and others said it was not.
Yegor always came tired, perspiring, short of breath, but always joking.
"The work of changing the present order of things, comrades, is a great work, but in order to advance it more rapidly, I must buy myself a pair of boots!" he said, pointing to his wet, torn shoes.
"My overshoes, too, are torn beyond the hope of redemption, and I get my feet wet every day.
I have no intention of migrating from the earth even to the nearest planet before we have publicly and openly renounced the old order of things; and I am therefore absolutely opposed to comrade Samoylov's motion for an armed demonstration.
I amend the motion to read that I be armed with a pair of strong boots, inasmuch as I am profoundly convinced that this will be of greater service for the ultimate triumph of socialism than even a grand exhibition of fisticuffs and black eyes!"
In the same playfully pretentious language, he told the workingmen the story of how in various foreign countries the people strove to lighten the burden of their lives. The mother loved to listen to his tales, and carried away a strange impression from them.
She conceived the shrewdest enemies of the people, those who deceived them most frequently and most cruelly, as little, big-bellied, red-faced creatures, unprincipled and greedy, cunning and heartless.
When life was hard for them under the domination of the czars, they would incite the common people against the ruler; and when the people arose and wrested the power from him, these little creatures got it into their own hands by deceit, and drove the people off to their holes; and if the people remonstrated, they killed them by the hundreds and thousands.
Once she summoned up courage and told him of the picture she had formed of life from his tales, and asked him:
"Is it so, Yegor Ivanovich?"
He burst into a guffaw, turned up his eyes, gasped for breath, and rubbed his chest.
"Exactly, granny! You caught the idea to a dot! Yes, yes! You've placed some ornaments on the canvas of history, you've added some flourishes, but that does not interfere with the correctness of the whole.
It's these very little, pot-bellied creatures who are the chief sinners and deceivers and the most poisonous insects that harass the human race.
The Frenchmen call them 'bourgeois'.
Remember that word, dear granny &#8212; bourgeois!
Brr!
How they chew us and grind us and suck the life out of us!"
"The rich, you mean?"
"Yes, the rich.
And that's their misfortune.
You see, if you keep adding copper bit by bit to a child's food, you prevent the growth of its bones, and he'll be a dwarf; and if from his youth up you poison a man with gold, you deaden his soul."
Once, speaking about Yegor, Pavel said:
"Do you know, Andrey, the people whose hearts are always aching are the ones who joke most?"
The Little Russian was silent a while, and then answered, blinking his eyes:
"No, that's not true.
If it were, then the whole of Russia would split its sides with laughter."
Natasha made her appearance again. She, too, had been in prison, in another city, but she had not changed. The mother noticed that in her presence the Little Russian grew more cheerful, was full of jokes, poked fun at everybody, and kept her laughing merrily.
But after she had left he would whistle his endless songs sadly, and pace up and down the room for a long time, wearily dragging his feet along the floor.
Sashenka came running in frequently, always gloomy, always in haste, and for some reason more and more angular and stiff.
Once when Pavel accompanied her out onto the porch, the mother overheard their abrupt conversation.
"Will you carry the banner?"
the girl asked in a low voice.
"Yes."
"Is it settled?"
"Yes, it's my right."
"To prison again?"
Pavel was silent.
"Is it not possible for you &#8212; " She stopped.
"What?"
"To give it up to somebody else?"
"No!"
he said aloud.
"Think of it! You're a man of such influence; you are so much liked &#8212; you and Nakhodka are the two foremost revolutionary workers here. Think how much you could accomplish for the cause of freedom!
You know that for this they'll send you off far, far, and for a long time!"
Nilovna thought she heard in the girl's voice the familiar sound of fear and anguish, and her words fell upon the mother's heart like heavy, icy drops of water.
"No, I have made up my mind.
Nothing can make me give it up!"
"Not even if I beg you &#8212; if I &#8212; "
Pavel suddenly began to speak rapidly with a peculiar sternness.
"You ought not to speak that way.
Why you?
You ought not!"
"I am a human being!"
she said in an undertone.
"A good human being, too!"
he said also in an undertone, and in a peculiar voice, as if unable to catch his breath.
"You are a dear human being to me, yes!
And that's why &#8212; why you mustn't talk that way!"
"Good-by!"
said the girl.
The mother heard the sound of her departing footsteps, and knew that she was walking away very fast, nay, almost running.
Pavel followed her into the yard.
A heavy oppressive fear fell like a load on the mother's breast. She did not understand what they had been talking about, but she felt that a new misfortune was in store for her, a great and sad misfortune.
And her thoughts halted at the question, "What does he want to do?"
Her thoughts halted, and were driven into her brain like a nail.
She stood in the kitchen by the oven, and looked through the window into the profound, starry heaven.
Pavel walked in from the yard with Andrey, and the Little Russian said, shaking his head:
"Oh, Isay, Isay!
What's to be done with him?"
"We must advise him to give up his project," said Pavel glumly.
"Then he'll hand over those who speak to him to the authorities," said the Little Russian, flinging his hat away in a corner.
"Pasha, what do you want to do?"
asked the mother, drooping her head.
"When?
Now?"
"The first of May &#8212; the first of May."
"Aha!"
exclaimed Pavel, lowering his voice.
"You heard!
I am going to carry our banner.
I will march with it at the head of the procession.
I suppose they'll put me in prison for it again."
The mother's eyes began to burn.
An unpleasant, dry feeling came into her mouth.
Pavel took her hand and stroked it.
"I must do it!
Please understand me!
It is my happiness!"
"I'm not saying anything," she answered, slowly raising her head; but when her eyes met the resolute gleam in his, she again lowered it.
He released her hand, and with a sigh said reproachfully:
"You oughtn't to be grieved.
You ought to feel rejoiced.
When are we going to have mothers who will rejoice in sending their children even to death?"
"Hopp!
Hopp!"
mumbled the Little Russian.
"How you gallop away!"
"Why; do I say anything to you?"
the mother repeated.
"I don't interfere with you.
And if I'm sorry for you &#8212; well, that's a mother's way."
Pavel drew away from her, and she heard his sharp, harsh words:
"There is a love that interferes with a man's very life."
She began to tremble, and fearing that he might deal another blow at her heart by saying something stern, she rejoined quickly:
"Don't, Pasha!
Why should you?
I understand.
You can't act otherwise, you must do it for your comrades."
"No!"
he replied.
"I am doing it for myself.
For their sake I can go without carrying the banner, but I'm going to do it!"
Andrey stationed himself in the doorway.
It was too low for him, and he had to bend his knees oddly.
He stood there as in a frame, one shoulder leaning against the jamb, his head and other shoulder thrust forward.
"I wish you would stop palavering, my dear sir," he said with a frown, fixing his protuberant eyes on Pavel's face.
He looked like a lizard in the crevice of a stone wall.
The mother was overcome with a desire to weep, but she did not want her son to see her tears, and suddenly mumbled: "Oh, dear! &#8212; I forgot &#8212; " and walked out to the porch.
There, her head in a corner, she wept noiselessly; and her copious tears weakened her, as though blood oozed from her heart along with them.
Through the door standing ajar the hollow sound of disputing voices reached her ear.
"Well, do you admire yourself for having tortured her?"
"You have no right to speak like that!"
shouted Pavel.
"A fine comrade I'd be to you if I kept quiet when I see you making a fool of yourself.
Why did you say all that to your mother?"
"A man must always speak firmly and without equivocation.
He must be clear and definite when he says 'Yes.'
He must be clear and definite when he says 'No.'"
"To her &#8212; to her must you speak that way?"
"To everybody!
I want no love, I want no friendship which gets between my feet and holds me back."
"Bravo!
You're a hero!
Go say all this to Sashenka.
You should have said that to her."
"I have!"
"You have! The way you spoke to your mother? You have not! To her you spoke softly; you spoke gently and tenderly to her. I did not hear you, but I know it! But you trot out your heroism before your mother. Of course!
Your heroism is not worth a cent."
Vlasova began to wipe the tears from her face in haste.
For fear a serious quarrel should break out between the Little Russian and Pavel, she quickly opened the door and entered the kitchen, shivering, terrified, and distressed.
"Ugh!
How cold!
And it's spring, too!"
She aimlessly removed various things in the kitchen from one place to another, and in order to drown the subdued voices in the room, she continued in a louder voice:
"Everything's changed.
People have grown hotter and the weather colder.
At this time of the year it used to get warm; the sky would clear, and the sun would be out."
Silence ensued in the room.
The mother stood waiting in the middle of the floor.
"Did you hear?"
came the low sound of the Little Russian's voice.
"You must understand it, the devil take it!
That's richer than yours."
"Will you have some tea?"
the mother called with a trembling voice, and without waiting for an answer she exclaimed, in order to excuse the tremor in her voice:
"How cold I am!"
Pavel came up slowly to her, looking at her from the corners of his eyes, a guilty smile quivering on his lips.
"Forgive me, mother!"
he said softly.
"I am still a boy, a fool."
"You mustn't hurt me!" she cried in a sorrowful voice, pressing his head to her bosom. "Say nothing! God be with you. Your life is your own! But don't wound my heart. How can a mother help sorrowing for her son? Impossible! I am sorry for all of you.
You are all dear to me as my own flesh and blood; you are all such good people!
And who will be sorry for you if I am not?
You go and others follow you.
They have all left everything behind them, Pasha, and gone into this thing.
It's just like a sacred procession."
A great ardent thought burned in her bosom, animating her heart with an exalted feeling of sad, tormenting joy; but she could find no words, and she waved her hands with the pang of muteness.
She looked into her son's face with eyes in which a bright, sharp pain had lit its fires.
"Very well, mother!
Forgive me.
I see all now!"
he muttered, lowering his head.
Glancing at her with a light smile, he added, embarrassed but happy: "I will not forget this, mother, upon my word."
She pushed him from her, and looking into the room she said to Andrey in a good-natured tone of entreaty:
"Andriusha, please don't you shout at him so!
Of course, you are older than he, and so you &#8212; "
The Little Russian was standing with his back toward her.
He sang out drolly without turning around to face her:
"Oh, oh, oh!
I'll bawl at him, be sure!
And I'll beat him some day, too."
She walked up slowly to him, with outstretched hand, and said:
"My dear, dear man!"
The Little Russian turned around, bent his head like an ox, and folding his hands behind his back walked past her into the kitchen.
Thence his voice issued in a tone of mock sullenness:
"You had better go away, Pavel, so I shan't bite your head off!
I am only joking, mother; don't believe it!
I want to prepare the samovar.
What coals these are!
Wet, the devil take them!"
He became silent, and when the mother walked into the kitchen he was sitting on the floor, blowing the coals in the samovar.
Without looking at her the Little Russian began again:
"Yes, mother, don't be afraid. I won't touch him. You know, I'm a good-natured chap, soft as a stewed turnip. And then &#8212; you hero out there, don't listen &#8212; I love him! But I don't like the waistcoat he wears.
You see, he has put on a new waistcoat, and he likes it very much, so he goes strutting about, and pushes everybody, crying: 'See, see what a waistcoat I have on!'
It's true, it's a fine waistcoat.
But what's the use of pushing people?
It's hot enough for us without it."
Pavel smiled and asked:
"How long do you mean to keep up your jabbering?
You gave me one thrashing with your tongue.
That's enough!"
Sitting on the floor, the Little Russian spread his legs around the samovar, and regarded Pavel. The mother stood at the door, and fixed a sad, affectionate gaze at Andrey's long, bent neck and the round back of his head.
He threw his body back, supporting himself with his hands on the floor, looked at the mother and at the son with his slightly reddened and blinking eyes, and said in a low, hearty voice:
"You are good people, yes, you are!"
Pavel bent down and grasped his hand.
"Don't pull my hand," said the Little Russian gruffly.
"You'll let go and I'll fall.
Go away!"
"Why are you so shy?"
the mother said pensively.
"You'd better embrace and kiss.
Press hard, hard!"
"Do you want to?"
asked Pavel softly.
"We &#8212; ell, why not?"
answered the Little Russian, rising.
Pavel dropped on his knees, and grasping each other firmly, they sank for a moment into each other's embrace &#8212; two bodies and one soul passionately and evenly burning with a profound feeling of friendship.
Tears ran down the mother's face, but this time they were easy tears.
Drying them she said in embarrassment:
"A woman likes to cry.
She cries when she is in sorrow; she cries when she is in joy!"
The Little Russian pushed Pavel away, and with a light movement, also wiping his eyes with his fingers, he said:
"Enough!
When the calves have had their frolic, they must go to the shambles.
What beastly coal this is!
I blew and blew on it, and got some of the dust in my eyes."
Pavel sat at the window with bent head, and said mildly:
"You needn't be ashamed of such tears."
The mother walked up to him, and sat down beside him.
Her heart was wrapped in a soft, warm, daring feeling.
She felt sad, but pleasant and at ease.
"It's all the same!"
she thought, stroking her son's hand.
"It can't be helped; it must be so!"
She recalled other such commonplace words, to which she had been accustomed for a long time; but they did not give adequate expression to all she had lived through that moment.
"I'll put the dishes on the table; you stay where you are, mother," said the Little Russian, rising from the floor, and going into the room.
"Rest a while.
Your heart has been worn out with such blows!"
And from the room his singing voice, raised to a higher pitch, was heard.
"It's not a nice thing to boast of, yet I must say we tasted the right life just now, real, human, loving life.
It does us good."
"Yes," said Pavel, looking at the mother.
"It's all different now," she returned.
"The sorrow is different, and the joy is different.
I do not know anything, of course!
I do not understand what it is I live by &#8212; and I can't express my feelings in words!"
"This is the way it ought to be!" said the Little Russian, returning. "Because, mark you, mother dear, a new heart is coming into existence, a new heart is growing up in life.
All hearts are smitten in the conflict of interests, all are consumed with a blind greed, eaten up with envy, stricken, wounded, and dripping with filth, falsehood, and cowardice.
All people are sick; they are afraid to live; they wander about as in a mist.
Everyone feels only his own toothache.
But lo, and behold!
Here is a Man coming and illuminating life with the light of reason, and he shouts: 'Oh, ho!
you straying roaches!
It's time, high time, for you to understand that all your interests are one, that everyone has the need to live, everyone has the desire to grow!'
The Man who shouts this is alone, and therefore he cries aloud; he needs comrades, he feels dreary in his loneliness, dreary and cold.
And at his call the stanch hearts unite into one great, strong heart, deep and sensitive as a silver bell not yet cast.
And hark!
This bell rings forth the message: 'Men of all countries, unite into one family!
Love is the mother of life, not hate!'
My brothers!
I hear this message sounding through the world!"
"And I do, too!"
cried Pavel.
The mother compressed her lips to keep them from trembling, and shut her eyes tight so as not to cry.
"When I lie in bed at night or am out walking alone &#8212; everywhere I hear this sound, and my heart rejoices.
And the earth, too &#8212; I know it &#8212; weary of injustice and sorrow, rings out like a bell, responding to the call, and trembles benignly, greeting the new sun arising in the breast of Man."
Pavel rose, lifted his hand, and was about to say something, but the mother took his other hand, and pulling him down whispered in his ear:
"Don't disturb him!"
"Do you know?"
said the Little Russian, standing in the doorway, his eyes aglow with a bright flame, "there is still much suffering in store for the people, much of their blood will yet flow, squeezed out by the hands of greed; but all that &#8212; all my suffering, all my blood, is a small price for that which is already stirring in my breast, in my mind, in the marrow of my bones!
I am already rich, as a star is rich in golden rays.
And I will bear all, I will suffer all, because there is within me a joy which no one, which nothing can ever stifle!
In this joy there is a world of strength!"
They drank tea and sat around the table until midnight, and conversed heart to heart and harmoniously about life, about people, and about the future.
Whenever a thought was clear to the mother, she would find confirmation of the idea by drawing upon some of her rude, coarse experiences.
She now felt as on that day when her father said to her roughly:
"What are you making a wry face about?
A fool has been found who wants to marry you.
Marry him!
All girls must get husbands; all women must bear children, and all children become a burden to their parents!"
After these words she saw before her an unavoidable path running for some inexplicable reason through a dark, dreary waste.
Thus it was at the present moment.
In anticipation of a new approaching misfortune, she uttered speechless words, addressing some imaginary person.
This lightened her mute pain, which reverberated in her heart like a tight chord.
The next day, early in the morning, very soon after Pavel and Andrey had left, Korsunova knocked at the door alarmingly, and called out hastily:
"Isay is killed!
Come, quick!"
The mother trembled; the name of the assassin flashed through her mind.
"Who did it?"
she asked curtly, throwing a shawl over her shoulders.
"The man's not sitting out there mourning over Isay.
He knocked him down and fled!"
On the street Marya said:
"Now they'll begin to rummage about again and look for the murderer.
It's a good thing your folks were at home last night.
I can bear witness to that.
I walked past here after midnight and glanced into the window, and saw all of you sitting around the table."
"What are you talking about, Marya?
Why, who could dream of such a thing about them?"
the mother ejaculated in fright.
"Well, who killed him?
Some one from among your people, of course!"
said Korsunova, regarding the idea as a matter to be taken for granted.
"Everybody knows he spied on them."
The mother stopped to fetch breath, and put her hand to her bosom.
"What are you going on that way for?
Don't be afraid!
Whoever it is will reap the harvest of his own rashness.
Let's go quick, or else they'll take him away!"
The mother walked on without asking herself why she went, and shaken by the thought of Vyesovshchikov.
"There &#8212; he's done it!"
Her mind was held fast by the one idea.
Not far from the factory walls, on the grounds of a building recently burned down, a crowd was gathered, tramping down the coal and stirring up ash dust. It hummed and buzzed like a swarm of bees.
There were many women in the crowd, even more children, and storekeepers, tavern waiters, policemen, and the gendarme Petlin, a tall old man with a woolly, silvery beard, and decorations on his breast.
Isay half reclined on the ground, his back resting against a burned joist, his bare head hanging over his right shoulder, his right hand in his trousers' pocket, and the fingers of his left hand clutching the soil.
The mother looked at Isay's face. One eye, wide open, had its dim glance fixed upon his hat lying between his lazily outstretched legs. His mouth was half open in astonishment, his little shriveled body, with its pointed head and bony face, seemed to be resting.
The mother crossed herself and heaved a sigh.
He had been repulsive to her when alive, but now she felt a mild pity for him.
"No blood!"
some one remarked in an undertone.
"He was evidently knocked down with a fist blow."
A stout woman, tugging at the gendarme's hand, asked:
"Maybe he is still alive?"
"Go away!"
the gendarme shouted not very loudly, withdrawing his hand.
"The doctor was here and said it was all over," somebody said to the woman.
A sarcastic, malicious voice cried aloud:
"They've choked up a denouncer's mouth.
Serves him right!"
The gendarme pushed aside the women, who were crowded close about him, and asked in a threatening tone:
"Who was that?
Who made that remark?"
The people scattered before him as he thrust them aside.
A number took quickly to their heels, and some one in the crowd broke into a mocking laugh.
The mother went home.
"No one is sorry," she thought.
The broad figure of Nikolay stood before her like a shadow, his narrow eyes had a cold, cruel look, and he wrung his right hand as if it had been hurt.
When Pavel and Andrey came to dinner, her first question was:
"Well?
Did they arrest anybody for Isay's murder?"
"We haven't heard anything about it," answered the Little Russian.
She saw that they were both downhearted and sullen.
"Nothing is said about Nikolay?"
the mother questioned again in a low voice.
Pavel fixed his stern eyes on the mother, and said distinctly:
"No, there is no talk of him.
He is not even thought of in connection with this affair.
He is away.
He went off on the river yesterday, and hasn't returned yet.
I inquired for him."
"Thank God!"
said the mother with a sigh of relief.
"Thank God!"
The Little Russian looked at her, and drooped his head.
"He lies there," the mother recounted pensively, "and looks as though he were surprised; that's the way his face looks. And no one pities him; no one bestows a good word on him.
He is such a tiny bit of a fellow, such a wretched-looking thing, like a bit of broken china.
It seems as if he had slipped on something and fallen, and there he lies!"
At dinner Pavel suddenly dropped his spoon and exclaimed:
"That's what I don't understand!"
"What?"
asked the Little Russian, who had been sitting at the table dismal and silent.
"To kill anything living because one wants to eat, that's ugly enough. To kill a beast &#8212; a beast of prey &#8212; that I can understand. I think I myself could kill a man who had turned into a beast preying upon mankind.
But to kill such a disgusting, pitiful creature &#8212; I don't understand how anyone could lift his hand for an act like that!"
The Little Russian raised his shoulders and dropped them again; then said:
"He was no less noxious than a beast."
"I know."
"We kill a mosquito for sucking just a tiny bit of our blood," the Little Russian added in a low voice.
"Well, yes, I am not saying anything about that.
I only mean to say it's so disgusting."
"What can you do?"
returned Andrey with another shrug of his shoulders.
After a long pause Pavel asked:
"Could you kill a fellow like that?"
The Little Russian regarded him with his round eyes, threw a glance at the mother, and said sadly, but firmly:
"For myself, I wouldn't touch a living thing.
But for comrades, for the cause, I am capable of everything.
I'd even kill.
I'd kill my own son."
"Oh, Andriusha!"
the mother exclaimed under her breath.
He smiled and said:
"It can't be helped!
Such is our life!"
"Ye-es," Pavel drawled.
"Such is our life."
With sudden excitation, as if obeying some impulse from within, Andrey arose, waved his hands, and said:
"How can a man help it? It so happens that we sometimes must abhor a certain person in order to hasten the time when it will be possible only to take delight in one another.
You must destroy those who hinder the progress of life, who sell human beings for money in order to buy quiet or esteem for themselves.
If a Judas stands in the way of honest people, lying in wait to betray them, I should be a Judas myself if I did not destroy him.
It's sinful, you say?
And do they, these masters of life, do they have the right to keep soldiers and executioners, public houses and prisons, places of penal servitude, and all that vile abomination by which they hold themselves in quiet security and in comfort?
If it happens sometimes that I am compelled to take their stick into my own hands, what am I to do then?
Why, I am going to take it, of course.
I will not decline.
They kill us out by the tens and hundreds.
That gives me the right to raise my hand and level it against one of the enemy, against that one of their number who comes closest to me, and makes himself more directly noxious to the work of my life than the others.
This is logic; but I go against logic for once.
I do not need your logic now.
I know that their blood can bring no results, I know that their blood is barren, fruitless!
Truth grows well only on the soil irrigated with the copious rain of our own blood, and their putrid blood goes to waste, without a trace left.
I know it!
But I take the sin upon myself.
I'll kill, if I see a need for it!
I speak only for myself, mind you.
My crime dies with me.
It will not remain a blot upon the future.
It will sully no one but myself &#8212; no one but myself."
He walked to and fro in the room, waving his hands in front of him, as if he were cutting something in the air out of his way. The mother looked at him with an expression of melancholy and alarm.
She felt as though something had hit him, and that he was pained.
The dangerous thoughts about murder left her.
If Vyesovshchikov had not killed Isay, none of Pavel's comrades could have done the deed.
Pavel listened to the Little Russian with drooping head, and Andrey stubbornly continued in a forceful tone:
"In your forward march it sometimes chances that you must go against your very own self. You must be able to give up everything &#8212; your heart and all. To give your life, to die for the cause &#8212; that's simple. Give more!
Give that which is dearer to you than your life!
Then you will see that grow with a vigorous growth which is dearest to you &#8212; your truth!"
He stopped in the middle of the room, his face grown pale and his eyes half closed.
Raising his hand and shaking it, he began slowly in a solemn tone of assurance with faith and with strength:
"There will come a time, I know, when people will take delight in one another, when each will be like a star to the other, and when each will listen to his fellow as to music. The free men will walk upon the earth, men great in their freedom.
They will walk with open hearts, and the heart of each will be pure of envy and greed, and therefore all mankind will be without malice, and there will be nothing to divorce the heart from reason.
Then life will be one great service to man!
His figure will be raised to lofty heights &#8212; for to free men all heights are attainable.
Then we shall live in truth and freedom and in beauty, and those will be accounted the best who will the more widely embrace the world with their hearts, and whose love of it will be the profoundest; those will be the best who will be the freest; for in them is the greatest beauty.
Then will life be great, and the people will be great who live that life."
He ceased and straightened himself.
Then swinging to and fro like the tongue of a bell, he added in a resonant voice that seemed to issue from the depths of his breast:
"So for the sake of this life I am prepared for everything!
I will tear my heart out, if necessary, and will trample it with my own feet!"
His face quivered and stiffened with excitement, and great, heavy tears rolled down one after the other.
Pavel raised his head and looked at him with a pale face and wide-open eyes.
The mother raised herself a little over the table with a feeling that something great was growing and impending.
"What is the matter with you, Andrey?"
Pavel asked softly.
The Little Russian shook his head, stretched himself like a violin string, and said, looking at the mother:
"I struck Isay."
She rose, and quickly walked up to him, all in a tremble, and seized his hands.
He tried to free his right hand, but she held it firmly in her grasp and whispered hotly:
"My dear, my own, hush!
It's nothing &#8212; it's nothing &#8212; nothing, Pasha!
Andriushenka &#8212; oh, what a calamity!
You sufferer!
My darling heart!"
"Wait, mother," the Little Russian muttered hoarsely.
"I'll tell you how it happened."
"Don't!"
she whispered, looking at him with tears in her eyes.
"Don't, Andriusha!
It isn't our business.
It's God's affair!"
Pavel came up to him slowly, looking at his comrade with moist eyes.
He was pale, and his lips trembled.
With a strange smile he said softly and slowly:
"Come, give me your hand, Andrey.
I want to shake hands with you.
Upon my word, I understand how hard it is for you!"
"Wait!"
said the Little Russian without looking at them, shaking his head, and tearing himself away from their grasp.
When he succeeded in freeing his right hand from the mother's, Pavel caught it, pressing it vigorously and wringing it.
"And you mean to tell me you killed that man?"
said the mother.
"No, you didn't do it!
If I saw it with my own eyes I wouldn't believe it."
"Stop, Andrey!
Mother is right.
This thing is beyond our judgment."
With one hand pressing Andrey's, Pavel laid the other on his shoulder, as if wishing to stop the tremor in his tall body.
The Little Russian bent his head down toward him, and said in a broken, mournful voice:
"I didn't want to do it, you know, Pavel. It happened when you walked ahead, and I remained behind with Ivan Gusev. Isay came from around a corner and stopped to look at us, and smiled at us.
Ivan walked off home, and I went on toward the factory &#8212; Isay at my side!"
Andrey stopped, heaved a deep sigh, and continued: "No one ever insulted me in such an ugly way as that dog!"
The mother pulled the Little Russian by the hand toward the table, gave him a shove, and finally succeeded in seating him on a chair. She sat down at his side close to him, shoulder to shoulder.
Pavel stood in front of them, holding Andrey's hand in his and pressing it.
"I understand how hard it is for you," he said.
"He told me that they know us all, that we are all on the gendarme's record, and that we are going to be dragged in before the first of May. I didn't answer, I laughed, but my blood boiled.
He began to tell me that I was a clever fellow, and that I oughtn't to go on the way I was going, but that I should rather &#8212; "
The Little Russian stopped, wiped his face with his right hand, shook his head, and a dry gleam flashed in his eyes.
"I understand!"
said Pavel.
"Yes," he said, "I should rather enter the service of the law." The Little Russian waved his hand, and swung his clenched fist. "The law! &#8212; curse his soul!" he hissed between his teeth. "It would have been better if he had struck me in the face.
It would have been easier for me, and better for him, perhaps, too!
But when he spit his dirty thought into my heart that way, I could not bear it."
Andrey pulled his hand convulsively from Pavel's, and said more hoarsely with disgust in his face:
"I dealt him a back-hand blow like that, downward and aslant, and walked away. I didn't even stop to look at him; I heard him fall. He dropped and was silent. I didn't dream of anything serious.
I walked on peacefully, just as if I had done no more than kick a frog with my foot.
And then &#8212; what's all this?
I started to work, and I heard them shouting: 'Isay is killed!'
I didn't even believe it, but my hand grew numb &#8212;and I felt awkward in working with it.
It didn't hurt me, but it seemed to have grown shorter."
He looked at his hand obliquely and said:
"All my life, I suppose, I won't be able to wash off that dirty stain from it."
"If only your heart is pure, my dear boy!"
the mother said softly, bursting into tears.
"I don't regard myself as guilty; no, I don't!"
said the Little Russian firmly.
"But it's disgust.
It disgusts me to carry such dirt inside of me.
I had no need of it.
It wasn't called for."
"What do you think of doing?"
asked Pavel, giving him a suspicious look.
"What am I going to do?" the Little Russian repeated thoughtfully, drooping his head. Then raising it again he said with a smile: "I am not afraid, of course, to say that it was I who struck him. But I am ashamed to say it.
I am ashamed to go to prison, and even to hard labor, maybe, for such a &#8212; nothing.
If some one else is accused, then I'll go and confess.
But otherwise, go all of my own accord &#8212; I cannot!"
He waved his hands, rose, and repeated:
"I cannot!
I am ashamed!"
The whistle blew.
The Little Russian, bending his head to one side, listened to the powerful roar, and shaking himself, said:
"I am not going to work."
"Nor I," said Pavel.
"I'll go to the bath house," said the Little Russian, smiling.
He got ready in silence and walked off, sullen and low-spirited.
The mother followed him with a compassionate look.
"Say what you please, Pasha, I cannot believe him! And even if I did believe him, I wouldn't lay any blame on him. No, I would not.
I know it's sinful to kill a man; I believe in God and in the Lord Jesus Christ, but still I don't think Andrey guilty.
I'm sorry for Isay.
He's such a tiny bit of a manikin.
He lies there in astonishment.
When I looked at him I remembered how he threatened to have you hanged.
And yet I neither felt hatred toward him nor joy because he was dead.
I simply felt sorry.
But now that I know by whose hand he fell I am not even sorry for him."
She suddenly became silent, reflected a while, and with a smile of surprise, exclaimed:
"Lord Jesus Christ!
Do you hear what I am saying, Pasha?"
Pavel apparently had not heard her.
Slowly pacing up and down the room with drooping head, he said pensively and with exasperation:
"Andrey won't forgive himself soon, if he'll forgive himself at all! There is life for you, mother. You see the position in which people are placed toward one another. You don't want to, but you must strike! And strike whom? Such a helpless being.
He is more wretched even than you because he is stupid.
The police, the gendarmes, the soldiers, the spies &#8212; they are all our enemies, and yet they are all such people as we are.
Their blood is sucked out of them just as ours is, and they are no more regarded as human beings than we are.
That's the way it is.
But they have set one part of the people against the other, blinded them with fear, bound them all hand and foot, squeezed them, and drained their blood, and used some as clubs against the others.
They've turned men into weapons, into sticks and stones, and called it civilization, government."
He walked up to his mother and said to her firmly:
"That's crime, mother! The heinous crime of killing millions of people, the murder of millions of souls! You understand &#8212; they kill the soul! You see the difference between them and us. He killed a man unwittingly. He feels disgusted, ashamed, sick &#8212; the main thing is he feels disgusted!
But they kill off thousands calmly, without a qualm, without pity, without a shudder of the heart.
They kill with pleasure and with delight.
And why?
They stifle everybody and everything to death merely to keep the timber of their houses secure, their furniture, their silver, their gold, their worthless papers &#8212; all that cheap trash which gives them control over the people.
Think, it's not for their own selves, for their persons, that they protect themselves thus, using murder and the mutilation of souls as a means &#8212; it's not for themselves they do it, but for the sake of their possessions.
They do not guard themselves from within, but from without."
He bent over to her, took her hands, and shaking them said:
"If you felt the abomination of it all, the disgrace and rottenness, you would understand our truth; you would then perceive how great it is, how glorious!"
The mother arose agitated, full of a desire to sink her heart into the heart of her son, and to join them in one burning, flaming torch.
"Wait, Pasha, wait!"
she muttered, panting for breath.
"I am a human being.
I feel.
Wait."
There was a loud noise of some one entering the porch.
Both of them started and looked at each other.
"If it's the police coming for Andrey &#8212; " Pavel whispered.
"I know nothing &#8212; nothing!"
the mother whispered back.
"Oh, God!"
The door opened slowly, and bending to pass through, Rybin strode in heavily.
"Here I am!"
he said, raising his head and smiling.
He wore a short fur overcoat, all stained with tar, a pair of dark mittens stuck from his belt, and his head was covered with a shaggy fur cap.
"Are you well?
Have they let you out of prison, Pavel?
So, how are you, Nilovna?"
"Why, you?
How glad I am to see you!"
Slowly removing his overclothes, Rybin said:
"Yes, I've turned muzhik again.
You're gradually turning gentlemen, and I am turning the other way.
That's it!"
Pulling his ticking shirt straight, he passed through the room, examined it attentively, and remarked:
"You can see your property has not increased, but you've grown richer in books.
So!
That's the dearest possession, books are, it's true.
Well, tell me how things are going with you."
"Things are going forward," said Pavel.
"Yes," said Rybin.
"We plow and we sow,
All high and low,
Boasting is cheap,
But the harvest we reap,
A feast we'll make,
And a rest we'll take."
"Will you have some tea?"
asked the mother.
"Yes, I'll have some tea, and I'll take a sip of vodka, too; and if you'll give me something to eat, I won't decline it, either.
I am glad to see you &#8212; that's what!"
"How's the world wagging with you, Mikhail Ivanych?"
Pavel inquired, taking a seat opposite Rybin.
"So, so.
Fairly well.
I settled at Edilgeyev.
Have you ever heard of Edilgeyev?
It's a fine village.
There are two fairs a year there; over two thousand inhabitants.
The people are an evil pack.
There's no land.
It's leased out in lots.
Poor soil!"
"Do you talk to them?"
asked Pavel, becoming animated.
"I don't keep mum. You know I have all your leaflets with me. I grabbed them away from here &#8212; thirty-four of them. But I carry on my propaganda chiefly with the Bible. You can get something out of it. It's a thick book. It's a government book.
It's published by the Holy Synod.
It's easy to believe!"
He gave Pavel a wink, and continued with a laugh: "But that's not enough!
I have come here to you to get books.
Yefim is here, too.
We are transporting tar; and so we turned aside to stop at your house.
You stock me up with books before Yefim comes.
He doesn't have to know too much!"
"Mother," said Pavel, "go get some books!
They'll know what to give you.
Tell them it's for the country."
"All right.
The samovar will be ready in a moment, and then I'll go."
"You have gone into this movement, too, Nilovna?" asked Rybin with a smile. "Very well. We have lots of eager candidates for books. There's a teacher there who creates a desire for them. He's a fine fellow, they say, although he belongs to the clergy.
We have a woman teacher, too, about seven versts from the village.
But they don't work with illegal books; they're a 'law and order' crowd out there; they're afraid.
But I want forbidden books &#8212; sharp, pointed books.
I'll slip them through their fingers.
When the police commissioners or the priest see that they are illegal books, they'll think it's the teachers who circulate them.
And in the meantime I'll remain in the background."
Well content with his hard, practical sense, he grinned merrily.
"Hm!"
thought the mother.
"He looks like a bear and behaves like a fox."
Pavel rose, and pacing up and down the room with even steps, said reproachfully:
"We'll let you have the books, but what you want to do is not right, Mikhail Ivanovich."
"Why is it not right?"
asked Rybin, opening his eyes in astonishment.
"You yourself ought to answer for what you do.
It is not right to manage matters so that others should suffer for what you do."
Pavel spoke sternly.
Rybin looked at the floor, shook his head, and said:
"I don't understand you."
"If the teachers are suspected," said Pavel, stationing himself in front of Rybin, "of distributing illegal books, don't you think they'll be put in jail for it?"
"Yes.
Well, what if they are?"
"But it's you who distribute the books, not they.
Then it's you that ought to go to prison."
"What a strange fellow you are!"
said Rybin with a smile, striking his hand on his knee.
"Who would suspect me, a muzhik, of occupying myself with such matters?
Why, does such a thing happen?
Books are affairs of the masters, and it's for them to answer for them."
The mother felt that Pavel did not understand Rybin, and she saw that he was screwing up his eyes &#8212; a sign of anger.
So she interjected in a cautious, soft voice:
"Mikhail Ivanovich wants to fix it so that he should be able to go on with his work, and that others should take the punishment for it."
"That's it!"
said Rybin, stroking his beard.
"Mother," Pavel asked dryly, "suppose some of our people, Andrey, for example, did something behind my back, and I were put in prison for it, what would you say to that?"
The mother started, looked at her son in perplexity, and said, shaking her head in negation:
"Why, is it possible to act that way toward a comrade?"
"Aha! Yes!" Rybin drawled. "I understand you, Pavel." And with a comical wink toward the mother, he added: "This is a delicate matter, mother." And again turning to Pavel he held forth in a didactic manner: "Your ideas on this subject are very green, brother.
In secret work there is no honor.
Think!
In the first place, they'll put those persons in prison on whom they find the books, and not the teachers.
That's number one!
Secondly, even though the teachers give the people only legal books to read, you know that they contain prohibited things just the same as in the forbidden books; only they are put in a different language.
The truths are fewer.
That's number two.
I mean to say, they want the same thing that I do; only they proceed by side paths, while I travel on the broad highway.
And thirdly, brother, what business have I with them?
How can a traveler on foot strike up friendship with a man on horseback?
Toward a muzhik, maybe, I wouldn't want to act that way.
But these people, one a clergyman, the other the daughter of a land proprietor, why they want to uplift the people, I cannot understand.
Their ideas, the ideas of the masters, are unintelligible to me, a muzhik.
What I do myself, I know, but what they are after I cannot tell.
For thousands of years they have punctiliously and consistently pursued the business of being masters, and have fleeced and flayed the skins of the muzhiks; and all of a sudden they wake up and want to open the muzhik's eyes.
I am not a man for fairy tales, brother, and that's in the nature of a fairy tale.
That's why I can't get interested in them.
The ways of the masters are strange to me.
You travel in winter, and you see some living creature in front of you.
But what it is &#8212; a wolf, a fox, or just a plain dog &#8212; you don't know."
The mother glanced at her son.
His face wore a gloomy expression.
Rybin's eyes sparkled with a dark gleam.
He looked at Pavel, combing down his beard with his fingers.
His air was at once complacent and excited.
"I have no time to flirt," he said.
"Life is a stern matter.
We live in dog houses, not in sheep pens, and every pack barks after its own fashion."
"There are some masters," said the mother, recalling certain familiar faces, "who die for the people, and let themselves be tortured all their lives in prison."
"Their calculations are different, and their deserts are different," said Rybin. "The muzhik grown rich turns into a gentleman, and the gentleman grown poor goes to the muzhik. Willy-nilly, he must have a pure soul, if his purse is empty.
Do you remember, Pavel, you explained to me that as a man lives, so he also thinks, and that if the workingman says 'Yes,' the master must say 'No,' and if the workingman says 'No,' the master, because of the nature of the beast, is bound to cry 'Yes.'
So you see, their natures are different one from the other.
The muzhik has his nature, and the gentleman has his.
When the peasant has a full stomach, the gentleman passes sleepless nights.
Of course, every fold has its black sheep, and I have no desire to defend the peasants wholesale."
Rybin rose to his feet somber and powerful.
His face darkened, his beard quivered as if he ground his teeth inaudibly, and he continued in a lowered voice:
"For five years I beat about from factory to factory, and got unaccustomed to the village. Then I went to the village again, looked around, and I found I could not live like that any more! You understand? I can't.
You live here, you don't know hunger, you don't see such outrages.
There hunger stalks after a man all his life like a shadow, and he has no hope for bread &#8212; no hope!
Hunger destroys the soul of the people; the very image of man is effaced from their countenances.
They do not live, they rot in dire unavoidable want.
And around them the government authorities watch like ravens to see if a crumb is not left over.
And if they do find a crumb, they snatch that away, too, and give you a punch in the face besides."
Rybin looked around, bent down to Pavel, his hand resting on the table:
"I even got sick and faint when I saw that life again. I looked around me &#8212; but I couldn't! However, I conquered my repulsion. 'Fiddlesticks!' I said. 'I won't let my feelings get the better of me. I'll stay here.
I won't get your bread for you; but I'll cook you a pretty mess, I will.'
I carry within me the wrongs of my people and hatred of the oppressor.
I feel these wrongs like a knife constantly cutting at my heart."
Perspiration broke out on his forehead; he shrugged his shoulders and slowly bent toward Pavel, laying a tremulous hand on his shoulder:
"Give me your help! Let me have books &#8212; such books that when a man has read them he will not be able to rest. Put a prickly hedgehog to his brains. Tell those city folks who write for you to write for the villagers also.
Let them write such hot truth that it will scald the village, that the people will even rush to their death."
He raised his hand, and laying emphasis on each word, he said hoarsely:
"Let death make amends for death. That is, die so that the people should arise to life again. And let thousands die in order that hosts of people all over the earth may arise to life again. That's it!
It's easy to die &#8212; but let the people rise to life again!
That's a different thing!
Let them rise up in rebellion!"
The mother brought in the samovar, looking askance at Rybin. His strong, heavy words oppressed her. Something in him reminded her of her husband. He, too, showed his teeth, waved his hands, and rolled up his sleeves; in him, too, there was that impatient wrath, impatient but dumb.
Rybin was not dumb; he was not silent; he spoke, and therefore was less terrible.
"That's necessary," said Pavel, nodding his head.
"We need a newspaper for the villages, too.
Give us material, and we'll print you a newspaper."
The mother looked at her son with a smile, and shook her head.
She had quietly put on her wraps and now went out of the house.
"Yes, do it.
We'll give you everything.
Write as simply as possible, so that even calves could understand," Rybin cried.
Then, suddenly stepping back from Pavel, he said, as he shook his head:
"Ah, me, if I were a Jew! The Jew, my dear boy, is the most believing man in the world! Isaiah, the prophet, or Job, the patient, believed more strongly than Christ's apostles. They could say words to make a man's hair stand on end.
But the apostles, you see, Pavel, couldn't.
The prophets believed not in the church, but in themselves; they had their God in themselves.
The apostles &#8212; they built churches; and the church is law.
Man must believe in himself, not in law.
Man carries the truth of God in his soul; he is not a police captain on earth, nor a slave!
All the laws are in myself."
The kitchen door opened, and somebody walked in.
"It's Yefim," said Rybin, looking into the kitchen.
"Come here, Yefim.
As for you, Pavel, think!
Think a whole lot.
There is a great deal to think about.
This is Yefim.
And this man's name is Pavel.
I told you about him."
A light-haired, broad-faced young fellow in a short fur overcoat, well built and evidently strong, stood before Pavel, holding his cap in both hands and looking at him from the corners of his gray eyes.
"How do you do?"
he said hoarsely, as he shook hands with Pavel, and stroked his curly hair with both hands.
He looked around the room, immediately spied the bookshelf, and walked over to it slowly.
"Went straight to them!"
Rybin said, winking to Pavel.
Yefim started to examine the books, and said:
"A whole lot of reading here!
But I suppose you haven't much time for it.
Down in the village they have more time for reading."
"But less desire?"
Pavel asked.
"Why?
They have the desire, too," answered the fellow, rubbing his chin.
"The times are so now that if you don't think, you might as well lie down and die.
But the people don't want to die; and so they've begun to make their brains work.
'Geology' &#8212; what's that?"
Pavel explained.
"We don't need it!"
Yefim said, replacing the book on the shelf.
Rybin sighed noisily, and said:
"The peasant is not so much interested to know where the land came from as where it's gone to, how it's been snatched from underneath his feet by the gentry.
It doesn't matter to him whether it's fixed or whether it revolves &#8212; that's of no importance &#8212; you can hang it on a rope, if you want to, provided it feeds him; you can nail it to the skies, provided it gives him enough to eat."
"'The History of Slavery,'" Yefim read out again, and asked Pavel: "Is it about us?"
"Here's an account of Russian serfdom, too," said Pavel, giving him another book.
Yefim took it, turned it in his hands, and putting it aside, said calmly:
"That's out of date."
"Have you an apportionment of land for yourself?"
inquired Pavel.
"We? Yes, we have. We are three brothers, and our portion is about ten acres and a half &#8212; all sand &#8212; good for polishing brass, but poor for making bread." After a pause he continued: "I've freed myself from the soil. What's the use?
It does not feed; it ties one's hands.
This is the fourth year that I'm working as a hired man.
I've got to become a soldier this fall.
Uncle Mikhail says: 'Don't go.
Now,' he says, 'the soldiers are being sent to beat the people.'
However, I think I'll go.
The army existed at the time of Stepan Timofeyevich Razin and Pugachev.
The time has come to make an end of it.
Don't you think so?"
he asked, looking firmly at Pavel.
"Yes, the time has come."
The answer was accompanied by a smile.
"But it's hard.
You must know what to say to soldiers, and how to say it."
"We'll learn; we'll know how," Yefim said.
"And if the superiors catch you at it, they may shoot you down," Pavel concluded, looking curiously at Yefim.
"They will show no mercy," the peasant assented calmly, and resumed his examination of the books.
"Drink your tea, Yefim; we've got to leave soon," said Rybin.
"Directly."
And Yefim asked again: "Revolution is an uprising, isn't it?"
Andrey came, red, perspiring, and dejected.
He shook Yefim's hand without saying anything, sat down by Rybin's side, and smiled as he looked at him.
"What's the trouble?
Why so blue?"
Rybin asked, tapping his knee.
"Nothing."
"Are you a workingman, too?"
asked Yefim, nodding his head toward the Little Russian.
"Yes," Andrey answered.
"Why?"
"This is the first time he's seen factory workmen," explained Rybin.
"He says they're different from others."
"How so?"
Pavel asked.
Yefim looked carefully at Andrey and said:
"You have sharp bones; peasants' bones are rounder."
"The peasant stands more firmly on his feet," Rybin supplemented. "He feels the ground under him although he does not possess it. Yet he feels the earth. But the factory workingman is something like a bird. He has no home. To-day he's here, to-morrow there.
Even his wife can't attach him to the same spot.
At the least provocation &#8212; farewell, my dear!
and off he goes to look for something better.
But the peasant wants to improve himself just where he is without moving off the spot.
There's your mother!"
And Rybin went out into the kitchen.
Yefim approached Pavel, and with embarrassment asked:
"Perhaps you will give me a book?"
"Certainly."
The peasant's eyes flashed, and he said rapidly:
"I'll return it.
Some of our folks bring tar not far from here.
They will return it for me.
Thank you!
Nowadays a book is like a candle in the night to us."
Rybin, already dressed and tightly girt, came in and said to Yefim:
"Come, it's time for us to go."
"Now, I have something to read!"
exclaimed Yefim, pointing to the book and smiling inwardly.
When he had gone, Pavel animatedly said, turning to Andrey:
"Did you notice those fellows?"
"Y-yes!"
slowly uttered the Little Russian.
"Like clouds in the sunset &#8212; thick, dark clouds, moving slowly."
"Mikhail!"
exclaimed the mother.
"He looks as if he had never been in a factory!
A peasant again.
And how formidable he looks!"
"I'm sorry you weren't here," said Pavel to Andrey, who was sitting at the table, staring gloomily into his glass of tea. "You could have seen the play of hearts. You always talk about the heart. Rybin got up a lot of steam; he upset me, crushed me.
I couldn't even reply to him.
How distrustful he is of people, and how cheaply he values them!
Mother is right.
That man has a formidable power in him."
"I noticed it," the Little Russian replied glumly. "They have poisoned people. When the peasants rise up, they'll overturn absolutely everything! They need bare land, and they will lay it bare, tear down everything." He spoke slowly, and it was evident that his mind was on something else.
The mother cautiously tapped him on the shoulder.
"Pull yourself together, Andriusha."
"Wait a little, my dear mother, my own!" he begged softly and kindly. "All this is so ugly &#8212; although I didn't mean to do any harm. Wait!"
And suddenly rousing himself, he said, striking the table with his hand: "Yes, Pavel, the peasant will lay the land bare for himself when he rises to his feet.
He will burn everything up, as if after a plague, so that all traces of his wrongs will vanish in ashes."
"And then he will get in our way," Pavel observed softly.
"It's our business to prevent that.
We are nearer to him; he trusts us; he will follow us."
"Do you know, Rybin proposes that we should publish a newspaper for the village?"
"We must do it, too.
As soon as possible."
Pavel laughed and said:
"I feel bad I didn't argue with him."
"We'll have a chance to argue with him still," the Little Russian rejoined. "You keep on playing your flute; whoever has gay feet, if they haven't grown into the ground, will dance to your tune.
Rybin would probably have said that we don't feel the ground under us, and need not, either.
Therefore it's our business to shake it.
Shake it once, and the people will be loosened from it; shake it once more, and they'll tear themselves away."
The mother smiled.
"Everything seems to be simple to you, Andriusha."
"Yes, yes, it's simple," said the Little Russian, and added gloomily: "Like life."
A few minutes later he said: "I'll go take a walk in the field."
"After the bath?
The wind will blow through you," the mother warned.
"Well, I need a good airing."
"Look out, you'll catch a cold," Pavel said affectionately.
"You'd better lie down and try to sleep."
"No, I'm going."
He put on his wraps, and went out without speaking.
"It's hard for him," the mother sighed.
"You know what?"
Pavel observed to her.
"It's very good that you started to say 'thou' to him after that."
She looked at him in astonishment, and after reflecting a moment, said:
"Um, I didn't even notice how it came.
It came all of itself.
He has grown so near to me.
I can't tell you in words just how I feel.
Oh, such a misfortune!"
"You have a good heart, mamma," Pavel said softly.
"I'm very glad if I have.
If I could only help you in some way, all of you.
If I only could!"
"Don't fear, you will."
She laughed softly:
"I can't help fearing; that's exactly what I can't help.
But thank you for the good word, my dear son."
"All right, mother; don't let's talk about it any more.
Know that I love you; and I thank you most heartily."
She walked into the kitchen in order not to annoy him with her tears.
Several days later Vyesovshchikov came in, as shabby, untidy, and disgruntled as ever.
"Haven't you heard who killed Isay?"
He stopped in his clumsy pacing of the room to turn to Pavel.
"No!"
Pavel answered briefly.
"There you got a man who wasn't squeamish about the job!
And I'd always been preparing to do it myself.
It was my job &#8212; just the thing for me!"
"Don't talk nonsense, Nikolay," Pavel said in a friendly manner.
"Now, really, what's the matter with you?"
interposed the mother kindly.
"You have a soft heart, and yet you keep barking like a vicious dog.
What do you go on that way for?"
At this moment she was actually pleased to see Nikolay.
Even his pockmarked face looked more agreeable to her.
She pitied him as never before.
"Well, I'm not fit for anything but jobs like that!" said Nikolay dully, shrugging his shoulders. "I keep thinking, and thinking where my place in the world is. There is no place for me! The people require to be spoken to, and I cannot.
I see everything; I feel all the people's wrongs; but I cannot express myself: I have a dumb soul."
He went over to Pavel with drooping head; and scraping his fingers on the table, he said plaintively, and so unlike himself, childishly, sadly: "Give me some hard work to do, comrade.
I can't live this life any longer.
It's so senseless, so useless.
You are all working in the movement, and I see that it is growing, and I'm outside of it all.
I haul boards and beams.
Is it possible to live for the sake of hauling timber?
Give me some hard work."
Pavel clasped his hand, pulling him toward himself.
"We will!"
From behind the curtains resounded the Little Russian's voice:
"Nikolay, I'll teach you typesetting, and you'll work as a compositor for us.
Yes?"
Nikolay went over to him and said:
"If you'll teach me that, I'll give you my knife."
"To the devil with your knife!"
exclaimed the Little Russian and burst out laughing.
"It's a good knife," Nikolay insisted.
Pavel laughed, too.
Vyesovshchikov stopped in the middle of the room and asked:
"Are you laughing at me?"
"Of course," replied the Little Russian, jumping out of bed.
"I'll tell you what!
Let's take a walk in the fields!
The night is fine; there's bright moonshine.
Let's go!"
"All right," said Pavel.
"And I'll go with you, too!"
declared Nikolay.
"I like to hear you laugh, Little Russian."
"And I like to hear you promise presents," answered the Little Russian, smiling.
While Andrey was dressing in the kitchen, the mother scolded him:
"Dress warmer!
You'll get sick."
And when they all had left, she watched them through the window; then looked at the ikon, and said softly: "God help them!"
She turned off the lamp and began to pray alone in the moonlit room.
The days flew by in such rapid succession that the mother could not give much thought to the first of May.
Only at night, when, exhausted by the noise and the exciting bustle of the day, she went to bed, tired and worn out, her heart would begin to ache.
"Oh, dear, if it would only be over soon!"
At dawn, when the factory whistle blew, the son and the Little Russian, after hastily drinking tea and snatching a bite, would go, leaving a dozen or so small commissions for the mother.
The whole day long she would move around like a squirrel in a wheel, cook dinner, and boil lilac-colored gelatin and glue for the proclamations.
Some people would come, leave notes with her to deliver to Pavel, and disappear, infecting her with their excitement.
The leaflets appealing to the working people to celebrate the first of May flooded the village and the factory. Every night they were posted on the fences, even on the doors of the police station; and every day they were found in the factory.
In the mornings the police would go around, swearing, tearing down and scraping off the lilac-covered bills from the fences.
At noon, however, these bills would fly over the streets again, rolling to the feet of the passers-by.
Spies were sent from the city to stand at the street corners and carefully scan the working people on their gay passages from and to the factory at dinner time.
Everybody was pleased to see the impotence of the police, and even the elder workingmen would smile at one another:
"Things are happening, aren't they?"
All over, people would cluster into groups hotly discussing the stirring appeals. Life was at boiling point.
This spring it held more of interest to everybody, it brought forth something new to all; for some it was a good excuse to excite themselves &#8212; they could pour out their malicious oaths on the agitators; to others, it brought perplexed anxiety as well as hope; to others again, the minority, an acute delight in the consciousness of being the power that set the village astir.
Pavel and Andrey scarcely ever went to bed. They came home just before the morning whistle sounded, tired, hoarse, and pale.
The mother knew that they held meetings in the woods and the marsh; that squads of mounted police galloped around the village, that spies were crawling all over, holding up and searching single workingmen, dispersing groups, and sometimes making an arrest.
She understood that her son and Andrey might be arrested any night.
Sometimes she thought that this would be the best thing for them.
Strangely enough, the investigation of the murder of Isay, the record clerk, suddenly ceased.
For two days the local police questioned the people in regard to the matter, examining about ten men or so, and finally lost interest in the affair.
Marya Korsunova, in a chat with the mother, reflected the opinion of the police, with whom she associated as amicably as with everybody:
"How is it possible to find the guilty man?
That morning some hundred people met Isay, and ninety of them, if not more, might have given him the blow.
During these eight years he has galled everybody."
The Little Russian changed considerably. His face became hollow-cheeked; his eyelids got heavy and drooped over his round eyes, half covering them. His smiles were wrung from him unwillingly, and two thin wrinkles were drawn from his nostrils to the corners of his lips.
He talked less about everyday matters; on the other hand, he was more frequently enkindled with a passionate fire; and he intoxicated his listeners with his ecstatic words about the future, about the bright, beautiful holiday, when they would celebrate the triumph of freedom and reason.
Listening to his words, the mother felt that he had gone further than anybody else toward the great, glorious day, and that he saw the joys of that future more vividly than the rest.
When the investigations of Isay's murder ceased, he said in disgust and smiling sadly:
"It's not only the people they treat like trash, but even the very men whom they set on the people like dogs. They have no concern for their faithful Judases, they care only for their shekels &#8212; only for them."
And after a sullen silence, he added: "And I pity that man the more I think of him.
I didn't intend to kill him &#8212; didn't want to!"
"Enough, Andrey," said Pavel severely.
"You happened to knock against something rotten, and it fell to pieces," added the mother in a low voice.
"You're right &#8212; but that's no consolation."
He often spoke in this way.
In his mouth the words assumed a peculiar, universal significance, bitter and corrosive.
At last, it was the first of May! The whistle shrilled as usual, powerful and peremptory.
The mother, who hadn't slept a minute during the night, jumped out of bed, made a fire in the samovar, which had been prepared the evening before, and was about, as always, to knock at the door of her son's and Andrey's room, when, with a wave of her hand she recollected the day, and went to seat herself at the window, leaning her cheek on her hand.
Clusters of light clouds, white and rosy, sailed swiftly across the pale blue sky, like huge birds frightened by the piercing shriek of the escaping steam. The mother watched the clouds, absorbed in herself. Her head was heavy, her eyes dry and inflamed from the sleepless night.
A strange calm possessed her breast, her heart was beating evenly, and her mind dwelt on only common, everyday things.
"I prepared the samovar too early; it will boil away.
Let them sleep longer to-day; they've worn themselves out, both of them."
A cheerful ray of sun looked into the room. She held her hand out to it, and with the other gently patted the bright young beam, smiling kindly and thoughtfully.
Then she rose, removed the pipe from the samovar, trying not to make a noise, washed herself, and began to pray, crossing herself piously, and noiselessly moving her lips.
Her face was radiant, and her right eyebrow kept rising gradually and suddenly dropping.
The second whistle blew more softly with less assurance, a tremor in its thick and mellow sound.
It seemed to the mother that the whistle lasted longer to-day than ever.
The clear, musical voice of the Little Russian sounded in the room:
"Pavel, do you hear?
They're calling."
The mother heard the patter of bare feet on the floor and some one yawn with gusto.
"The samovar is ready," she cried.
"We're getting up," Pavel answered merrily.
"The sun is rising," said the Little Russian.
"The clouds are racing; they're out of place to-day."
He went into the kitchen all disheveled but jolly after his sleep.
"Good morning, mother dear; how did you sleep?"
The mother went to him and whispered:
"Andriusha, keep close to him."
"Certainly.
As long as it depends on us, we'll always stick to each other, you may be sure."
"What's that whispering about?"
Pavel asked.
"Nothing.
She told me to wash myself better, so the girls will look at me," replied the Little Russian, going out on the porch to wash himself.
"'Rise up, awake, you workingmen,'" Pavel sang softly.
As the day grew, the clouds dispersed, chased by the wind.
The mother got the dishes ready for the tea, shaking her head over the thought of how strange it was for both of them to be joking and smiling all the time on this morning, when who knew what would befall them in the afternoon.
Yet, curiously enough, she felt herself calm, almost happy.
They sat a long time over the tea to while away the hours of expectation. Pavel, as was his wont, slowly and scrupulously mixed the sugar in the glass with his spoon, and accurately salted his favorite crust from the end of the loaf.
The Little Russian moved his feet under the table &#8212; he never could at once settle his feet comfortably &#8212; and looked at the rays of sunlight playing on the wall and ceiling.
"When I was a youngster of ten years," he recounted, "I wanted to catch the sun in a glass. So I took the glass, stole to the wall, and bang! I cut my hand and got a licking to boot.
After the licking I went out in the yard and saw the sun in a puddle.
So I started to trample the mud with my feet.
I covered myself with mud, and got another drubbing.
What was I to do?
I screamed to the sun: 'It doesn't hurt me, you red devil; it doesn't hurt me!'
and stuck out my tongue at him.
And I felt comforted."
"Why did the sun seem red to you?"
Pavel asked, laughing.
"There was a blacksmith opposite our house, with fine red cheeks, and a huge red beard.
I thought the sun resembled him."
The mother lost patience and said:
"You'd better talk about your arrangements for the procession."
"Everything's been arranged," said Pavel.
"No use talking of things once decided upon.
It only confuses the mind," the Little Russian added.
"If we are all arrested, Nikolay Ivanovich will come and tell you what to do.
He will help you in every way."
"All right," said the mother with a heavy sigh.
"Let's go out," said Pavel dreamily.
"No, rather stay indoors," replied Andrey.
"No need to annoy the eyes of the police so often.
They know you well enough."
Fedya Mazin came running in, all aglow, with red spots on his cheeks, quivering with youthful joy.
His animation dispelled the tedium of expectation for them.
"It's begun!" he reported. "The people are all out on the street, their faces sharp as the edge of an ax. Vyesovshchikov, the Gusevs, and Samoylov have been standing at the factory gates all the time, and have been making speeches.
Most of the people went back from the factory, and returned home.
Let's go!
It's just time!
It's ten o'clock already."
"I'm going!"
said Pavel decidedly.
"You'll see," Fedya assured them, "the whole factory will rise up after dinner."
And he hurried away, followed by the quiet words of the mother:
"Burning like a wax candle in the wind."
She rose and went into the kitchen to dress.
"Where are you going, mother?"
"With you," she said.
Andrey looked at Pavel pulling his mustache.
Pavel arranged his hair with a quick gesture, and went to his mother.
"Mother, I will not tell you anything; and don't you tell me anything, either.
Right, mother?"
"All right, all right!
God bless you!"
she murmured.
When she went out and heard the holiday hum of the people's voices &#8212; an anxious and expectant hum &#8212; when she saw everywhere, at the gates and windows, crowds of people staring at Andrey and her son, a blur quivered before her eyes, changes from a transparent green to a muddy gray.
People greeted them &#8212; there was something peculiar in their greetings.
She caught whispered, broken remarks:
"Here they are, the leaders!"
"We don't know who the leaders are!"
"Why, I didn't say anything wrong."
At another place some one in a yard shouted excitedly:
"The police will get them, and that'll be the end of them!"
"What if they do?"
retorted another voice.
Farther on a crying woman's voice leaped frightened from the window to the street:
"Consider!
Are you a single man, are you?
They are bachelors and don't care!"
When they passed the house of Zosimov, the man without legs, who received a monthly allowance from the factory because of his mutilation, he stuck his head through the window and cried out:
"Pavel, you scoundrel, they'll wring your head off for your doings, you'll see!"
The mother trembled and stopped. The exclamation aroused in her a sharp sensation of anger. She looked up at the thick, bloated face of the cripple, and he hid himself, cursing. Then she quickened her pace, overtook her son, and tried not to fall behind again.
He and Andrey seemed not to notice anything, not to hear the outcries that pursued them.
They moved calmly, without haste, and talked loudly about commonplaces.
They were stopped by Mironov, a modest, elderly man, respected by everybody for his clean, sober life.
"Not working either, Daniil Ivanovich?"
Pavel asked.
"My wife is going to be confined.
Well, and such an exciting day, too," Mironov responded, staring fixedly at the comrades.
He said to them in an undertone:
"Boys, I hear you're going to make an awful row &#8212; smash the superintendent's windows."
"Why, are we drunk?"
exclaimed Pavel.
"We are simply going to march along the streets with flags, and sing songs," said the Little Russian.
"You'll have a chance to hear our songs.
They're our confession of faith."
"I know your confession of faith," said Mironov thoughtfully.
"I read your papers.
You, Nilovna," he exclaimed, smiling at the mother with knowing eyes, "are you going to revolt, too?"
"Well, even if it's only before death, I want to walk shoulder to shoulder with the truth."
"I declare!"
said Mironov.
"I guess they were telling the truth when they said you carried forbidden books to the factory."
"Who said so?"
asked Pavel.
"Oh, people.
Well, good-by!
Behave yourselves!"
The mother laughed softly; she was pleased to hear that such things were said of her.
Pavel smilingly turned to her:
"Oh, you'll get into prison, mother!"
"I don't mind," she murmured.
The sun rose higher, pouring warmth into the bracing freshness of the spring day. The clouds floated more slowly, their shadows grew thinner and more transparent, and crawled gently over the streets and roofs.
The bright sunlight seemed to clean the village, to wipe the dust and dirt from the walls and the tedium from the faces.
Everything assumed a more cheerful aspect; the voices sounded louder, drowning the far-off rumble and heavings of the factory machines.
Again, from all sides, from the windows and the yards, different words and voices, now uneasy and malicious, now thoughtful and gay, found their way to the mother's ears.
But this time she felt a desire to retort, to thank, to explain, to participate in the strangely variegated life of the day.
Off a corner of the main thoroughfare, in a narrow by-street, a crowd of about a hundred people had gathered, and from its depths resounded Vyesovshchikov's voice:
"They squeeze our blood like juice from huckleberries."
His words fell like hammer blows on the people.
"That's true!"
the resonant cry rang out simultaneously from a number of throats.
"The boy is doing his best," said the Little Russian.
"I'll go help him."
He bent low and before Pavel had time to stop him he twisted his tall, flexible body into the crowd like a corkscrew into a cork, and soon his singing voice rang out:
"Comrades! They say there are various races on the earth &#8212; Jews and Germans, English and Tartars. But I don't believe it. There are only two nations, two irreconcilable tribes &#8212; the rich and the poor.
People dress differently and speak differently; but look at the rich Frenchman, the rich German, or the rich Englishman, you'll see that they are all Tartars in the way they treat their workingman &#8212; a plague on them!"
A laugh broke out in the crowd.
"On the other hand, we can see the French workingmen, the Tartar workingmen, the Turkish workingmen, all lead the same dog's life, as we &#8212; we, the Russian workingmen."
More and more people joined the crowd; one after the other they thronged into the by-street, silent, stepping on tiptoe, and craning their necks.
Andrey raised his voice:
"The workingmen of foreign countries have already learned this simple truth, and to-day, on this bright first of May, the foreign working people fraternize with one another. They quit their work, and go out into the streets to look at themselves, to take stock of their immense power.
On this day, the workingmen out there throb with one heart; for all hearts are lighted with the consciousness of the might of the working people; all hearts beat with comradeship, each and every one of them is ready to lay down his life in the war for the happiness of all, for freedom and truth to all &#8212; comrades!"
"The police!"
some one shouted.
From the main street four mounted policemen flourishing their knouts came riding into the by-street directly at the crowd.
"Disperse!"
"What sort of talking is going on?"
"Who's speaking?"
The people scowled, giving way to the horses unwillingly.
Some climbed up on fences; raillery was heard here and there.
"They put pigs on horses; they grunt: 'Here we are, leaders, too!'"
resounded a sonorous, provoking voice.
The Little Russian was left alone in the middle of the street; two horses shaking their manes pressed at him.
He stepped aside, and at the same time the mother grasped his hand, pulling him away grumbling:
"You promised to stick to Pasha; and here you are running up against the edge of a knife all by yourself."
"I plead guilty," said the Little Russian, smiling at Pavel.
"Ugh!
What a force of police there is in the world!"
"All right," murmured the mother.
An alarming, crushing exhaustion came over her.
It rose from within her and made her dizzy.
There was a strange alternation of sadness and joy in her heart.
She wished the afternoon whistle would sound.
They reached the square where the church stood. Around the church within the paling a thick crowd was sitting and standing. There were some five hundred gay youth and bustling women with children darting around the groups like butterflies. The crowd swung from side to side.
The people raised their heads and looked into the distance in different directions, waiting impatiently.
"Mitenka!"
softly vibrated a woman's voice.
"Have pity on yourself!"
"Stop!"
rang out the response.
And the grave Sizov spoke calmly, persuasively:
"No, we mustn't abandon our children.
They have grown wiser than ourselves; they live more boldly.
Who saved our cent for the marshes?
They did.
We must remember that.
For doing it they were dragged to prison; but we derived the benefit.
The benefit was for all."
The whistle blew, drowning the talk of the crowd.
The people started.
Those sitting rose to their feet.
For a moment the silence of death prevailed; all became watchful, and many faces grew pale.
"Comrades!"
resounded Pavel's voice, ringing and firm.
A dry, hot haze burned the mother's eyes, and with a single movement of her body, suddenly strengthened, she stood behind her son.
All turned toward Pavel, and drew up to him, like iron filings attracted by a magnet.
"Brothers!
The hour has come to give up this life of ours, this life of greed, hatred, and darkness, this life of violence and falsehood, this life where there is no place for us, where we are no human beings."
He stopped, and everybody maintained silence, moving still closer to him.
The mother stared at her son.
She saw only his eyes, his proud, brave, burning eyes.
"Comrades!
We have decided to declare openly who we are; we raise our banner to-day, the banner of reason, of truth, of liberty!
And now I raise it!"
A flag pole, white and slender, flashed in the air, bent down, cleaving the crowd.
For a moment it was lost from sight; then over the uplifted faces the broad canvas of the working people's flag spread its wings like a red bird.
Pavel raised his hand &#8212; the pole swung, and a dozen hands caught the smooth white rod.
Among them was the mother's hand.
"Long live the working people!"
he shouted.
Hundreds of voices responded to his sonorous call.
"Long live our party, comrades, our spiritual mother."
The crowd seethed and hummed. Those who understood the meaning of the flag squeezed their way up to it. Mazin, Samoylov, and the Gusevs stood close at Pavel's side. Nikolay with bent head pushed his way through the crowd.
Some other people unknown to the mother, young and with burning eyes, jostled her.
"Long live the working people of all countries!"
shouted Pavel.
And ever increasing in force and joy, a thousand-mouthed echo responded in a soul-stirring acclaim.
The mother clasped Pavel's hand, and somebody else's, too.
She was breathless with tears, yet refrained from shedding them.
Her legs trembled, and with quivering lips she cried:
"Oh, my dear boys, that's true.
There you are now &#8212; "
A broad smile spread over Nikolay's pockmarked face; he stared at the flag and, stretching his hand toward it, roared out something; then caught the mother around the neck with the same hand, kissed her, and laughed.
"Comrades!" sang out the Little Russian, subduing the noise of the crowd with his mellow voice. "Comrades! We have now started a holy procession in the name of the new God, the God of Truth and Light, the God of Reason and Goodness.
We march in this holy procession, comrades, over a long and hard road.
Our goal is far, far away, and the crown of thorns is near!
Those who don't believe in the might of truth, who have not the courage to stand up for it even unto death, who do not believe in themselves and are afraid of suffering &#8212; such of you, step aside!
We call upon those only who believe in our triumph.
Those who cannot see our goal, let them not walk with us; only misery is in store for them!
Fall into line, comrades!
Long live the first of May, the holiday of freemen!"
The crowd drew closer.
Pavel waved the flag.
It spread out in the air and sailed forward, sunlit, smiling, red, and glowing.
"Let us renounce the old world!"
resounded Fedya Mazin's ringing voice; and scores of voices took up the cry.
It floated as on a mighty wave.
"Let us shake its dust from our feet."
The mother marched behind Mazin with a smile on her dry lips, and looked over his head at her son and the flag. Everywhere, around her, was the sparkle of fresh young cheerful faces, the glimmer of many-colored eyes; and at the head of all &#8212; her son and Andrey.
She heard their voices, Andrey's, soft and humid, mingled in friendly accord with the heavy bass of her son:
"Rise up, awake, you workingmen!
On, on, to war, you hungry hosts!"
Men ran toward the red flag, raising a clamor; then joining the others, they marched along, their shouts lost in the broad sounds of the song of the revolution.
The mother had heard that song before.
It had often been sung in a subdued tone; and the Little Russian had often whistled it.
But now she seemed for the first time to hear this appeal to unite in the struggle.
"We march to join our suffering mates."
The song flowed on, embracing the people.
Some one's face, alarmed yet joyous, moved along beside the mother's, and a trembling voice spoke, sobbing:
"Mitya!
Where are you going?"
The mother interfered without stopping:
"Let him go!
Don't be alarmed!
Don't fear!
I myself was afraid at first, too.
Mine is right at the head &#8212; he who bears the standard &#8212; that's my son!"
"Murderers!
Where are you going?
There are soldiers over there!"
And suddenly clasping the mother's hand in her bony hands, the tall, thin woman exclaimed: "My dear!
How they sing!
Oh, the sectarians!
And Mitya is singing!"
"Don't be troubled!"
murmured the mother.
"It's a sacred thing.
Think of it!
Christ would not have been, either, if men hadn't perished for his sake."
This thought had flashed across the mother's mind all of a sudden and struck her by its simple, clear truth.
She stared at the woman, who held her hand firmly in her clasp, and repeated, smiling:
"Christ would not have been, either, if men hadn't suffered for his sake."
Sizov appeared at her side.
He took off his hat and waving it to the measure of the song, said:
"They're marching openly, eh, mother?
And composed a song, too!
What a song, mother, eh?"
"The Czar for the army soldiers must have,
Then give him your sons &#8212; "
"They're not afraid of anything," said Sizov.
"And my son is in the grave.
The factory crushed him to death, yes!"
The mother's heart beat rapidly, and she began to lag behind.
She was soon pushed aside hard against a fence, and the close-packed crowd went streaming past her.
She saw that there were many people, and she was pleased.
"Rise up, awake, you workingmen!"
It seemed as if the blare of a mighty brass trumpet were rousing men and stirring in some hearts the willingness to fight, in other hearts a vague joy, a premonition of something new, and a burning curiosity; in still others a confused tremor of hope and curiosity.
The song was an outlet, too, for the stinging bitterness accumulated during years.
The people looked ahead, where the red banner was swinging and streaming in the air. All were saying something and shouting; but the individual voice was lost in the song &#8212; the new song, in which the old note of mournful meditation was absent.
It was not the utterance of a soul wandering in solitude along the dark paths of melancholy perplexity, of a soul beaten down by want, burdened with fear, deprived of individuality, and colorless.
It breathed no sighs of a strength hungering for space; it shouted no provoking cries of irritated courage ready to crush both the good and the bad indiscriminately.
It did not voice the elemental instinct of the animal to snatch freedom for freedom's sake, nor the feeling of wrong or vengeance capable of destroying everything and powerless to build up anything.
In this song there was nothing from the old, slavish world.
It floated along directly, evenly; it proclaimed an iron virility, a calm threat.
Simple, clear, it swept the people after it along an endless path leading to the far distant future; and it spoke frankly about the hardships of the way.
In its steady fire a heavy clod seemed to burn and melt &#8212; the sufferings they had endured, the dark load of their habitual feelings, their cursed dread of what was coming.
"They all join in!"
somebody roared exultantly.
"Well done, boys!"
Apparently the man felt something vast, to which he could not give expression in ordinary words, so he uttered a stiff oath. Yet the malice, the blind dark malice of a slave also streamed hotly through his teeth.
Disturbed by the light shed upon it, it hissed like a snake, writhing in venomous words.
"Heretics!"
a man with a broken voice shouted from a window, shaking his fist threateningly.
A piercing scream importunately bored into the mother's ears "Rioting against the emperor, against his Majesty the Czar?
No, no?"
Agitated people flashed quickly past her, a dark lava stream of men and women, carried along by this song, which cleared every obstacle out of its path.
Growing in the mother's breast was the mighty desire to shout to the crowd:
"Oh, my dear people!"
There, far away from her, was the red banner &#8212; she saw her son without seeing him &#8212; his bronzed forehead, his eyes burning with the bright fire of faith.
Now she was in the tail of the crowd among the people who walked without hurrying, indifferent, looking ahead with the cold curiosity of spectators who know beforehand how the show will end.
They spoke softly with confidence.
"One company of infantry is near the school, and the other near the factory."
"The governor has come."
"Is that so?"
"I saw him myself.
He's here."
Some one swore jovially and said:
"They've begun to fear our fellows, after all, haven't they?
The soldiers have come and the governor &#8212; "
"Dear boys!"
throbbed in the breast of the mother.
But the words around her sounded dead and cold.
She hastened her steps to get away from these people, and it was not difficult for her to outstrip their lurching gait.
Suddenly the head of the crowd, as it were, bumped against something; its body swung backward with an alarming, low hum. The song trembled, then flowed on more rapidly and louder; but again the dense wave of sounds hesitated in its forward course.
Voices fell out of the chorus one after the other.
Here and there a voice was raised in the effort to bring the song to its previous height, to push it forward:
"Rise up, awake, you workingmen!
On, on, to war, you hungry hosts!"
Though she saw nothing and was ignorant of what was happening there in front, the mother divined, and elbowed her way rapidly through the crowd.
"Comrades!" the voice of Pavel was heard. "Soldiers are people the same as ourselves. They will not strike us! Why should they beat us? Because we bear the truth necessary for all? This our truth is necessary to them, too.
Just now they do not understand this; but the time is nearing when they will rise with us, when they will march, not under the banner of robbers and murderers, the banner which the liars and beasts order them to call the banner of glory and honor, but under our banner of freedom and goodness!
We ought to go forward so that they should understand our truth the sooner.
Forward, comrades!
Ever forward!"
Pavel's voice sounded firm, the words rang in the air distinctly. But the crowd fell asunder; one after the other the people dropped off to the right or to the left, going toward their homes, or leaning against the fences.
Now the crowd had the shape of a wedge, and its point was Pavel, over whose head the banner of the laboring people was burning red.
At the end of the street, closing the exit to the square, the mother saw a low, gray wall of men, one just like the other, without faces.
On the shoulder of each a bayonet was smiling its thin, chill smile; and from this entire immobile wall a cold gust blew down on the workmen, striking the breast of the mother and penetrating her heart.
She forced her way into the crowd among people familiar to her, and, as it were, leaned on them.
She pressed closely against a tall, lame man with a clean-shaven face.
In order to look at her, he had to turn his head stiffly.
"What do you want?
Who are you?"
he asked her.
"The mother of Pavel Vlasov," she answered, her knees trembling beneath her, her lower lip involuntarily dropping.
"Ha-ha!"
said the lame man.
"Very well!"
"Comrades!"
Pavel cried.
"Onward all your lives.
There is no other way for us!
Sing!"
The atmosphere grew tense.
The flag rose and rocked and waved over the heads of the people, gliding toward the gray wall of soldiers.
The mother trembled.
She closed her eyes, and cried: "Oh &#8212; oh!"
None but Pavel, Andrey, Samoylov, and Mazin advanced beyond the crowd.
The limpid voice of Fedya Mazin slowly quivered in the air.
"'In mortal strife &#8212; '" he began the song.
"'You victims fell &#8212; '" answered thick, subdued voices.
The words dropped in two heavy sighs.
People stepped forward, each footfall audible.
A new song, determined and resolute, burst out:
"You yielded up your lives for them."
Fedya's voice wreathed and curled like a bright ribbon.
"A-ha-ha-ha!"
some one exclaimed derisively.
"They've struck up a funeral song, the dirty dogs!"
"Beat him!"
came the angry response.
The mother clasped her hands to her breast, looked about, and saw that the crowd, before so dense, was now standing irresolute, watching the comrades walk away from them with the banner, followed by about a dozen people, one of whom, however, at every forward move, jumped aside as if the path in the middle of the street were red hot and burned his soles.
"The tyranny will fall &#8212; " sounded the prophetic song from the lips of Fedya.
"And the people will rise!"
the chorus of powerful voices seconded confidently and menacingly.
But the harmonious flow of the song was broken by the quiet words:
"He is giving orders."
"Charge bayonets!"
came the piercing order from the front.
The bayonets curved in the air, and glittered sharply; then fell and stretched out to confront the banner.
"Ma-arch!"
"They're coming!"
said the lame man, and thrusting his hands into his pockets made a long step to one side.
The mother, without blinking, looked on. The gray line of soldiers tossed to and fro, and spread out over the entire width of the street. It moved on evenly, coolly, carrying in front of itself a fine-toothed comb of sparkling bayonets. Then it came to a stand.
The mother took long steps to get nearer to her son.
She saw how Andrey strode ahead of Pavel and fenced him off with his long body. "
Get alongside of me!"
Pavel shouted sharply.
Andrey was singing, his hands clasped behind his back, his head uplifted.
Pavel pushed him with his shoulder, and again cried:
"At my side!
Let the banner be in front!"
"Disperse!"
called a little officer in a thin voice, brandishing a white saber.
He lifted his feet high, and without bending his knees struck his soles on the ground irritably.
The high polish on his boots caught the eyes of the mother.
To one side and somewhat behind him walked a tall, clean-shaven man, with a thick, gray mustache. He wore a long gray overcoat with a red underlining, and yellow stripes on his trousers. His gait was heavy, and like the Little Russian, he clasped his hands behind his back.
He regarded Pavel, raising his thick gray eyebrows.
The mother seemed to be looking into infinity. At each breath her breast was ready to burst with a loud cry. It choked her, but for some reason she restrained it. Her hands clutched at her bosom. She staggered from repeated thrusts. She walked onward without thought, almost without consciousness.
She felt that behind her the crowd was getting thinner; a cold wind had blown on them and scattered them like autumn leaves.
The men around the red banner moved closer and closer together. The faces of the soldiers were clearly seen across the entire width of the street, monstrously flattened, stretched out in a dirty yellowish band.
In it were unevenly set variously colored eyes, and in front the sharp bayonets glittered crudely.
Directed against the breasts of the people, although not yet touching them, they drove them apart, pushing one man after the other away from the crowd and breaking it up.
Behind her the mother heard the trampling noise of those who were running away.
Suppressed, excited voices cried:
"Disperse, boys!"
"Vlasov, run!"
"Back, Pavel!"
"Drop the banner, Pavel!"
Vyesovshchikov said glumly.
"Give it to me!
I'll hide it!"
He grabbed the pole with his hand; the flag rocked backward.
"Let go!"
thundered Pavel.
Nikolay drew his hand back as if it had been burned.
The song died away.
Some persons crowded solidly around Pavel; but he cut through to the front.
A sudden silence fell.
Around the banner some twenty men were grouped, not more, but they stood firmly.
The mother felt drawn to them by awe and by a confused desire to say something to them.
"Take this thing away from him, lieutenant."
The even voice of the tall old man was heard.
He pointed to the banner.
A little officer jumped up to Pavel, snatched at the flag pole, and shouted shrilly:
"Drop it!"
The red flag trembled in the air, moving to the right and to the left, then rose again.
The little officer jumped back and sat down.
Nikolay darted by the mother, shaking his outstretched fist.
"Seize them!"
the old man roared, stamping his feet.
A few soldiers jumped to the front, one of them flourishing the butt end of his gun.
The banner trembled, dropped, and disappeared in a gray mass of soldiers.
"Oh!"
somebody groaned aloud.
And the mother yelled like a wild animal.
But the clear voice of Pavel answered her from out of the crowd of soldiers:
"Good-by, mother!
Good-by, dear!"
"He's alive!
He remembered!"
were the two strokes at the mother's heart.
"Good-by, mother dear!"
came from Andrey.
Waving her hands, she raised herself on tiptoe, and tried to see them.
There was the round face of Andrey above the soldiers' heads.
He was smiling and bowing to her.
"Oh, my dear ones!
Andriusha!
Pasha!"
she shouted.
"Good-by, comrades!"
they called from among the soldiers.
A broken, manifold echo responded to them.
It resounded from the windows and the roofs.
The mother felt some one pushing her breast.
Through the mist in her eyes she saw the little officer.
His face was red and strained, and he was shouting to her:
"Clear out of here, old woman!"
She looked down on him, and at his feet saw the flag pole broken in two parts, a piece of red cloth on one of them.
She bent down and picked it up.
The officer snatched it out of her hands, threw it aside, and shouted again, stamping his feet:
"Clear out of here, I tell you!"
A song sprang up and floated from among the soldiers:
"Arise, awake, you workingmen!"
Everything was whirling, rocking, trembling.
A thick, alarming noise, resembling the dull hum of telegraph wires, filled the air.
The officer jumped back, screaming angrily:
"Stop the singing, Sergeant Kraynov!"
The mother staggered to the fragment of the pole, which he had thrown down, and picked it up again.
"Gag them!"
The song became confused, trembled, expired.
Somebody took the mother by the shoulders, turned her around, and shoved her from the back.
"Go, go!
Clear the street!"
shouted the officer.
About ten paces from her, the mother again saw a thick crowd of people.
They were howling, grumbling, whistling, as they backed down the street.
The yards were drawing in a number of them.
"Go, you devil!" a young soldier with a big mustache shouted right into the mother's ear. He brushed against her and shoved her onto the sidewalk. She moved away, leaning on the flag pole. She went quickly and lightly, but her legs bent under her.
In order not to fall she clung to walls and fences.
People in front were falling back alongside of her, and behind her were soldiers, shouting: "Go, go!"
The soldiers got ahead of her; she stopped and looked around. Down the end of the street she saw them again scattered in a thin chain, blocking the entrance to the square, which was empty. Farther down were more gray figures slowly moving against the people.
She wanted to go back; but uncalculatingly went forward again, and came to a narrow, empty by-street into which she turned.
She stopped again.
She sighed painfully, and listened.
Somewhere ahead she heard the hum of voices.
Leaning on the pole she resumed her walk.
Her eyebrows moved up and down, and she suddenly broke into a sweat; her lips quivered; she waved her hands, and certain words flashed up in her heart like sparks, kindling in her a strong, stubborn desire to speak them, to shout them.
The by-street turned abruptly to the left; and around the corner the mother saw a large, dense crowd of people.
Somebody's voice was speaking loudly and firmly:
"They don't go to meet the bayonets from sheer audacity.
Remember that!"
"Just look at them.
Soldiers advance against them, and they stand before them without fear.
Y-yes!"
"Think of Pasha Vlasov!"
"And how about the Little Russian?"
"Hands behind his back and smiling, the devil!"
"My dear ones!
My people!"
the mother shouted, pushing into the crowd.
They cleared the way for her respectfully.
Somebody laughed:
"Look at her with the flag in her hand!"
"Shut up!"
said another man sternly.
The mother with a broad sweep of her arms cried out:
"Listen for the sake of Christ! You are all dear people, you are all good people. Open up your hearts. Look around without fear, without terror. Our children are going into the world.
Our children are going, our blood is going for the truth; with honesty in their hearts they open the gates of the new road &#8212; a straight, wide road for all.
For all of you, for the sake of your young ones, they have devoted themselves to the sacred cause.
They seek the sun of new days that shall always be bright.
They want another life, the life of truth and justice, of goodness for all."
"'Listen for the sake of Christ.'"
Her heart was rent asunder, her breast contracted, her throat was hot and dry. Deep inside of her, words were being born, words of a great, all-embracing love. They burned her tongue, moving it more powerfully and more freely. She saw that the people were listening to her words.
All were silent.
She felt that they were thinking as they surrounded her closely; and the desire grew in her, now a clear desire, to drive these people to follow her son, to follow Andrey, to follow all those who had fallen into the soldiers' hands, all those who were left entirely alone, all those who were abandoned.
Looking at the sullen, attentive faces around her, she resumed with soft force:
"Our children are going in the world toward happiness. They went for the sake of all, and for Christ's truth &#8212; against all with which our malicious, false, avaricious ones have captured, tied, and crushed us.
My dear ones &#8212; why it is for you that our young blood rose &#8212; for all the people, for all the world, for all the workingmen, they went!
Then don't go away from them, don't renounce, don't forsake them, don't leave your children on a lonely path &#8212; they went just for the purpose of showing you all the path to truth, to take all on that path!
Pity yourselves!
Love them!
Understand the children's hearts.
Believe your sons' hearts; they have brought forth the truth; it burns in them; they perish for it.
Believe them!"
Her voice broke down, she staggered, her strength gone.
Somebody seized her under the arms.
"She is speaking God's words!"
a man shouted hoarsely and excitedly.
"God's words, good people!
Listen to her!"
Another man said in pity of her:
"Look how she's hurting herself!"
"She's not hurting herself, but hitting us, fools, understand that!"
was the reproachful reply.
A high-pitched, quavering voice rose up over the crowd:
"Oh, people of the true faith!
My Mitya, pure soul, what has he done?
He went after his dear comrades.
She speaks truth &#8212; why did we forsake our children?
What harm have they done us?"
The mother trembled at these words and replied with soft tears.
"Go home, Nilovna!
Go, mother!
You're all worn out," said Sizov loudly.
He was pale, his disheveled beard shook.
Suddenly knitting his brows he threw a stern glance about him on all, drew himself up to his full height, and said distinctly:
"My son Matvey was crushed in the factory.
You know it!
But were he alive, I myself would have sent him into the lines of those &#8212; along with them.
I myself would have told him: 'Go you, too, Matvey!
That's the right cause, that's the honest cause!'"
He stopped abruptly, and a sullen silence fell on all, in the powerful grip of something huge and new, but something that no longer frightened them.
Sizov lifted his hand, shook it, and continued:
"It's an old man who is speaking to you. You know me! I've been working here thirty-nine years, and I've been alive fifty-three years. To-day they've arrested my nephew, a pure and intelligent boy. He, too, was in the front, side by side with Vlasov; right at the banner."
Sizov made a motion with his hand, shrank together, and said as he took the mother's hand: "This woman spoke the truth.
Our children want to live honorably, according to reason, and we have abandoned them; we walked away, yes!
Go, Nilovna!"
"My dear ones!"
she said, looking at them all with tearful eyes.
"The life is for our children and the earth is for them."
"Go, Nilovna, take this staff and lean upon it!"
said Sizov, giving her the fragment of the flag pole.
All looked at the mother with sadness and respect. A hum of sympathy accompanied her. Sizov silently put the people out of her way, and they silently moved aside, obeying a blind impulse to follow her. They walked after her slowly, exchanging brief, subdued remarks on the way.
Arrived at the gate of her house, she turned to them, leaning on the fragment of the flag pole, and bowed in gratitude.
"Thank you!"
she said softly.
And recalling the thought which she fancied had been born in her heart, she said: "Our Lord Jesus Christ would not have been, either, if people had not perished for his sake."
The crowd looked at her in silence.
She bowed to the people again, and went into her house, and Sizov, drooping his head, went in with her.
The people stood at the gates and talked.
Then they began to depart slowly and quietly.