"What a queer man," remarked the Munchkin boy, when the party had resumed its journey.
"And so nice and polite," added Scraps, bobbing her head.
"I think he is the handsomest man I've seen since I came to life."
"Handsome is as handsome does," quoted the Shaggy Man; "but we must admit that no living scarecrow is handsomer.
The chief merit of my friend is that he is a great thinker, and in Oz it is considered good policy to follow his advice."
"I didn't notice any brains in his head," observed the Glass Cat.
"You can't see 'em work, but they're there, all right," declared the Shaggy Man.
"I hadn't much confidence in his brains myself, when first I came to Oz, for a humbug Wizard gave them to him; but I was soon convinced that the Scarecrow is really wise; and, unless his brains make him so, such wisdom is unaccountable."
"Is the Wizard of Oz a humbug?"
asked Ojo.
"Not now.
He was once, but he has reformed and now assists Glinda the Good, who is the Royal Sorceress of Oz and the only one licensed to practice magic or sorcery.
Glinda has taught our old Wizard a good many clever things, so he is no longer a humbug."
They walked a little while in silence and then Ojo said:
"If Ozma forbids the Crooked Magician to restore Unc Nunkie to life, what shall I do?"
The Shaggy Man shook his head.
"In that case you can't do anything," he said. "But don't be discouraged yet. We will go to Princess Dorothy and tell her your troubles, and then we will let her talk to Ozma.
Dorothy has the kindest little heart in the world, and she has been through so many troubles herself that she is sure to sympathize with you."
"Is Dorothy the little girl who came here from Kansas?"
asked the boy.
"Yes.
In Kansas she was Dorothy Gale.
I used to know her there, and she brought me to the Land of Oz.
But now Ozma has made her a Princess, and Dorothy's Aunt Em and Uncle Henry are here, too."
Here the Shaggy Man uttered a long sigh, and then he continued: "It's a queer country, this Land of Oz; but I like it, nevertheless."
"What is queer about it?"
asked Scraps.
"You, for instance," said he.
"Did you see no girls as beautiful as I am in your own country?"
she inquired.
"None with the same gorgeous, variegated beauty," he confessed.
"In America a girl stuffed with cotton wouldn't be alive, nor would anyone think of making a girl out of a patchwork quilt."
"What a queer country America must be!"
she exclaimed in great surprise.
"The Scarecrow, whom you say is wise, told me I am the most beautiful creature he has ever seen."
"I know; and perhaps you are - from a scarecrow point of view," replied the Shaggy Man; but why he smiled as he said it Scraps could not imagine.
As they drew nearer to the Emerald City the travelers were filled with admiration for the splendid scenery they beheld.
Handsome houses stood on both sides of the road and each had a green lawn before it as well as a pretty flower garden.
"In another hour," said the Shaggy Man, "we shall come in sight of the walls of the Royal City."
He was walking ahead, with Scraps, and behind them came the Woozy and the Glass Cat.
Ojo had lagged behind, for in spite of the warnings he had received the boy's eyes were fastened on the clover that bordered the road of yellow bricks and he was eager to discover if such a thing as a six-leaved clover really existed.
Suddenly he stopped short and bent over to examine the ground more closely. Yes; here at last was a clover with six spreading leaves. He counted them carefully, to make sure.
In an instant his heart leaped with joy, for this was one of the important things he had come for - one of the things that would restore dear Unc Nunkie to life.
He glanced ahead and saw that none of his companions was looking back.
Neither were any other people about, for it was midway between two houses.
The temptation was too strong to be resisted.
"I might search for weeks and weeks, and never find another six-leaved clover," he told himself, and quickly plucking the stem from the plant he placed the prized clover in his basket, covering it with the other things he carried there.
Then, trying to look as if nothing had happened, he hurried forward and overtook his comrades.
The Emerald City, which is the most splendid as well as the most beautiful city in any fairyland, is surrounded by a high, thick wall of green marble, polished smooth and set with glistening emeralds.
There are four gates, one facing the Munchkin Country, one facing the Country of the Winkies, one facing the Country of the Quadlings and one facing the Country of the Gillikins.
The Emerald City lies directly in the center of these four important countries of Oz.
The gates had bars of pure gold, and on either side of each gateway were built high towers, from which floated gay banners.
Other towers were set at distances along the walls, which were broad enough for four people to walk abreast upon.
This enclosure, all green and gold and glittering with precious gems, was indeed a wonderful sight to greet our travelers, who first observed it from the top of a little hill; but beyond the wall was the vast city it surrounded, and hundreds of jeweled spires, domes and minarets, flaunting flags and banners, reared their crests far above the towers of the gateways.
In the center of the city our friends could see the tops of many magnificent trees, some nearly as tall as the spires of the buildings, and the Shaggy Man told them that these trees were in the royal gardens of Princess Ozma.
They stood a long time on the hilltop, feasting their eyes on the splendor of the Emerald City.
"Whee!"
exclaimed Scraps, clasping her padded hands in ecstacy, "that'll do for me to live in, all right.
No more of the Munchkin Country for these patches - and no more of the Crooked Magician!"
"Why, you belong to Dr. Pipt," replied Ojo, looking at her in amazement.
"You were made for a servant, Scraps, so you are personal property and not your own mistress."
"Bother Dr. Pipt! If he wants me, let him come here and get me. I'll not go back to his den of my own accord; that's certain. Only one place in the Land of Oz is fit to live in, and that's the Emerald City. It's lovely!
It's almost as beautiful as I am, Ojo."
"In this country," remarked the Shaggy Man, "people live wherever our Ruler tells them to.
It wouldn't do to have everyone live in the Emerald City, you know, for some must plow the land and raise grains and fruits and vegetables, while others chop wood in the forests, or fish in the rivers, or herd the sheep and the cattle."
"Poor things!"
said Scraps.
"I'm not sure they are not happier than the city people," replied the Shaggy Man. "There's a freedom and independence in country life that not even the Emerald City can give one. I know that lots of the city people would like to get back to the land.
The Scarecrow lives in the country, and so do the Tin Woodman and Jack Pumpkinhead; yet all three would be welcome to live in Ozma's palace if they cared to.
Too much splendor becomes tiresome, you know.
But, if we're to reach the Emerald City before sundown, we must hurry, for it is yet a long way off."
The entrancing sight of the city had put new energy into them all and they hurried forward with lighter steps than before.
There was much to interest them along the roadway, for the houses were now set more closely together and they met a good many people who were coming or going from one place or another.
All these seemed happy-faced, pleasant people, who nodded graciously to the strangers as they passed, and exchanged words of greeting.
At last they reached the great gateway, just as the sun was setting and adding its red glow to the glitter of the emeralds on the green walls and spires.
Somewhere inside the city a band could be heard playing sweet music; a soft, subdued hum, as of many voices, reached their ears; from the neighboring yards came the low mooing of cows waiting to be milked.
They were almost at the gate when the golden bars slid back and a tall soldier stepped out and faced them. Ojo thought he had never seen so tall a man before.
The soldier wore a handsome green and gold uniform, with a tall hat in which was a waving plume, and he had a belt thickly encrusted with jewels.
But the most peculiar thing about him was his long green beard, which fell far below his waist and perhaps made him seem taller than he really was.
"Halt!"
said the Soldier with the Green Whiskers, not in a stern voice but rather in a friendly tone.
They halted before he spoke and stood looking at him.
"Good evening, Colonel," said the Shaggy Man.
"What's the news since I left?
Anything important?"
"Billina has hatched out thirteen new chickens," replied the Soldier with the Green Whiskers, "and they're the cutest little fluffy yellow balls you ever saw.
The Yellow Hen is mighty proud of those children, I can tell you."
"She has a right to be," agreed the Shaggy Man.
"Let me see; that's about seven thousand chicks she has hatched out; isn't it, General?"
"That, at least," was the reply.
"You will have to visit Billina and congratulate her."
"It will give me pleasure to do that," said the Shaggy Man.
"But you will observe that I have brought some strangers home with me.
I am going to take them to see Dorothy."
"One moment, please," said the soldier, barring their way as they started to enter the gate.
"I am on duty, and I have orders to execute.
Is anyone in your party named Ojo the Unlucky?"
"Why, that's me!"
cried Ojo, astonished at hearing his name on the lips of a stranger.
The Soldier with the Green Whiskers nodded.
"I thought so," said he, "and I am sorry to announce that it is my painful duty to arrest you."
"Arrest me!"
exclaimed the boy.
"What for?"
"I haven't looked to see," answered the soldier.
Then he drew a paper from his breast pocket and glanced at it.
"Oh, yes; you are to be arrested for willfully breaking one of the Laws of Oz."
"Breaking a law!"
said Scraps.
"Nonsense, Soldier; you're joking."
"Not this time," returned the soldier, with a sigh.
"My dear child - what are you, a rummage sale or a guess-me-quick? - in me you behold the Body-Guard of our gracious Ruler, Princess Ozma, as well as the Royal Army of Oz and the Police Force of the Emerald City."
"And only one man!"
exclaimed the Patchwork Girl.
"Only one, and plenty enough. In my official positions I've had nothing to do for a good many years - so long that I began to fear I was absolutely useless - until to-day.
An hour ago I was called to the presence of her Highness, Ozma of Oz, and told to arrest a boy named Ojo the Unlucky, who was journeying from the Munchkin Country to the Emerald City and would arrive in a short time.
This command so astonished me that I nearly fainted, for it is the first time anyone has merited arrest since I can remember.
You are rightly named Ojo the Unlucky, my poor boy, since you have broken a Law of Oz.
"But you are wrong," said Scraps.
"Ozma is wrong - you are all wrong - for Ojo has broken no Law."
"Then he will soon be free again," replied the Soldier with the Green Whiskers.
"Anyone accused of crime is given a fair trial by our Ruler and has every chance to prove his innocence.
But just now Ozma's orders must be obeyed."
With this he took from his pocket a pair of handcuffs made of gold and set with rubies and diamonds, and these he snapped over Ojo's wrists.
The boy was so bewildered by this calamity that he made no resistance at all. He knew very well he was guilty, but it surprised him that Ozma also knew it. He wondered how she had found out so soon that he had picked the six-leaved clover.
He handed his basket to Scraps and said:
"Keep that, until I get out of prison.
If I never get out, take it to the Crooked Magician, to whom it belongs."
The Shaggy Man had been gazing earnestly in the boy's face, uncertain whether to defend him or not; but something he read in Ojo's expression made him draw back and refuse to interfere to save him.
The Shaggy Man was greatly surprised and grieved, but he knew that Ozma never made mistakes and so Ojo must really have broken the Law of Oz.
The Soldier with the Green Whiskers now led them all through the gate and into a little room built in the wall.
Here sat a jolly little man, richly dressed in green and having around his neck a heavy gold chain to which a number of great golden keys were attached.
This was the Guardian of the Gate and at the moment they entered his room he was playing a tune upon a mouth-organ.
"Listen!"
he said, holding up his hand for silence.
"I've just composed a tune called 'The Speckled Alligator.'
It's in patch-time, which is much superior to rag-time, and I've composed it in honor of the Patchwork Girl, who has just arrived."
"How did you know I had arrived?"
asked Scraps, much interested.
"It's my business to know who's coming, for I'm the Guardian of the Gate.
Keep quiet while I play you 'The Speckled Alligator.'"
It wasn't a very bad tune, nor a very good one, but all listened respectfully while he shut his eyes and swayed his head from side to side and blew the notes from the little instrument.
When it was all over the Soldier with the Green Whiskers said:
"Guardian, I have here a prisoner."
"Good gracious!
A prisoner?"
cried the little man, jumping up from his chair.
"Which one?
Not the Shaggy Man?"
"No; this boy."
"Ah; I hope his fault is as small as himself," said the Guardian of the Gate.
"But what can he have done, and what made him do it?"
"Can't say," replied the soldier.
"All I know is that he has broken the Law."
"But no one ever does that!"
"Then he must be innocent, and soon will be released.
I hope you are right, Guardian.
Just now I am ordered to take him to prison.
Get me a prisoner's robe from your Official Wardrobe."
The Guardian unlocked a closet and took from it a white robe, which the soldier threw over Ojo. It covered him from head to foot, but had two holes just in front of his eyes, so he could see where to go.
In this attire the boy presented a very quaint appearance.
As the Guardian unlocked a gate leading from his room into the streets of the Emerald City, the Shaggy Man said to Scraps:
"I think I shall take you directly to Dorothy, as the Scarecrow advised, and the Glass Cat and the Woozy may come with us.
Ojo must go to prison with the Soldier with the Green Whiskers, but he will be well treated and you need not worry about him."
"What will they do with him?"
asked Scraps.
"That I cannot tell.
Since I came to the Land of Oz no one has ever been arrested or imprisoned - until Ojo broke the Law."
"Seems to me that girl Ruler of yours is making a big fuss over nothing," remarked Scraps, tossing her yarn hair out of her eyes with a jerk of her patched head.
"I don't know what Ojo has done, but it couldn't be anything very bad, for you and I were with him all the time."
The Shaggy Man made no reply to this speech and presently the Patchwork Girl forgot all about Ojo in her admiration of the wonderful city she had entered.
They soon separated from the Munchkin boy, who was led by the Soldier with the Green Whiskers down a side street toward the prison. Ojo felt very miserable and greatly ashamed of himself, but he was beginning to grow angry because he was treated in such a disgraceful manner.
Instead of entering the splendid Emerald City as a respectable traveler who was entitled to a welcome and to hospitality, he was being brought in as a criminal, handcuffed and in a robe that told all he met of his deep disgrace.
Ojo was by nature gentle and affectionate and if he had disobeyed the Law of Oz it was to restore his dear Unc Nunkie to life. His fault was more thoughtless than wicked, but that did not alter the fact that he had committed a fault.
At first he had felt sorrow and remorse, but the more he thought about the unjust treatment he had received - unjust merely because he considered it so - the more he resented his arrest, blaming Ozma for making foolish laws and then punishing folks who broke them.
Only a six-leaved clover!
A tiny green plant growing neglected and trampled under foot.
What harm could there be in picking it?
Ojo began to think Ozma must be a very bad and oppressive Ruler for such a lovely fairyland as Oz.
The Shaggy Man said the people loved her; but how could they?
The little Munchkin boy was so busy thinking these things - which many guilty prisoners have thought before him - that he scarcely noticed all the splendor of the city streets through which they passed.
Whenever they met any of the happy, smiling people, the boy turned his head away in shame, although none knew who was beneath the robe.
By and by they reached a house built just beside the great city wall, but in a quiet, retired place. It was a pretty house, neatly painted and with many windows. Before it was a garden filled with blooming flowers.
The Soldier with the Green Whiskers led Ojo up the gravel path to the front door, on which he knocked.
A woman opened the door and, seeing Ojo in his white robe, exclaimed:
"Goodness me!
A prisoner at last.
But what a small one, Soldier."
"The size doesn't matter, Tollydiggle, my dear.
The fact remains that he is a prisoner," said the soldier.
"And, this being the prison, and you the jailer, it is my duty to place the prisoner in your charge."
"True.
Come in, then, and I'll give you a receipt for him."
They entered the house and passed through a hall to a large circular room, where the woman pulled the robe off from Ojo and looked at him with kindly interest.
The boy, on his part, was gazing around him in amazement, for never had he dreamed of such a magnificent apartment as this in which he stood.
The roof of the dome was of colored glass, worked into beautiful designs.
The walls were paneled with plates of gold decorated with gems of great size and many colors, and upon the tiled floor were soft rugs delightful to walk upon.
The furniture was framed in gold and upholstered in satin brocade and it consisted of easy chairs, divans and stools in great variety.
Also there were several tables with mirror tops and cabinets filled with rare and curious things.
In one place a case filled with books stood against the wall, and elsewhere Ojo saw a cupboard containing all sorts of games.
"May I stay here a little while before I go to prison?"
asked the boy, pleadingly.
"Why, this is your prison," replied Tollydiggle, "and in me behold your jailor.
Take off those handcuffs, Soldier, for it is impossible for anyone to escape from this house."
"I know that very well," replied the soldier and at once unlocked the handcuffs and released the prisoner.
The woman touched a button on the wall and lighted a big chandelier that hung suspended from the ceiling, for it was growing dark outside.
Then she seated herself at a desk and asked:
"What name?"
"Ojo the Unlucky," answered the Soldier with the Green Whiskers.
"Unlucky?
Ah, that accounts for it," said she.
"What crime?"
"Breaking a Law of Oz."
"All right.
There's your receipt, Soldier; and now I'm responsible for the prisoner.
I'm glad of it, for this is the first time I've ever had anything to do, in my official capacity," remarked the jailer, in a pleased tone.
"It's the same with me, Tollydiggle," laughed the soldier.
"But my task is finished and I must go and report to Ozma that I've done my duty like a faithful Police Force, a loyal Army and an honest Body-Guard - as I hope I am."
Saying this, he nodded farewell to Tollydiggle and Ojo and went away.
"Now, then," said the woman briskly, "I must get you some supper, for you are doubtless hungry.
What would you prefer: planked whitefish, omelet with jelly or mutton-chops with gravy?"
Ojo thought about it.
Then he said: "I'll take the chops, if you please."
"Very well; amuse yourself while I'm gone; I won't be long," and then she went out by a door and left the prisoner alone.
Ojo was much astonished, for not only was this unlike any prison he had ever heard of, but he was being treated more as a guest than a criminal. There were many windows and they had no locks. There were three doors to the room and none were bolted.
He cautiously opened one of the doors and found it led into a hallway.
But he had no intention of trying to escape.
If his jailor was willing to trust him in this way he would not betray her trust, and moreover a hot supper was being prepared for him and his prison was very pleasant and comfortable.
So he took a book from the case and sat down in a big chair to look at the pictures.
This amused him until the woman came in with a large tray and spread a cloth on one of the tables.
Then she arranged his supper, which proved the most varied and delicious meal Ojo had ever eaten in his life.
Tollydiggle sat near him while he ate, sewing on some fancy work she held in her lap.
When he had finished she cleared the table and then read to him a story from one of the books.
"Is this really a prison?"
he asked, when she had finished reading.
"Indeed it is," she replied.
"It is the only prison in the Land of Oz."
"And am I a prisoner?"
"Bless the child!
Of course."
"Then why is the prison so fine, and why are you so kind to me?"
he earnestly asked.
Tollydiggle seemed surprised by the question, but she presently answered:
"We consider a prisoner unfortunate. He is unfortunate in two ways - because he has done something wrong and because he is deprived of his liberty.
Therefore we should treat him kindly, because of his misfortune, for otherwise he would become hard and bitter and would not be sorry he had done wrong.
Ozma thinks that one who has committed a fault did so because he was not strong and brave; therefore she puts him in prison to make him strong and brave.
When that is accomplished he is no longer a prisoner, but a good and loyal citizen and everyone is glad that he is now strong enough to resist doing wrong.
You see, it is kindness that makes one strong and brave; and so we are kind to our prisoners."
Ojo thought this over very carefully.
"I had an idea," said he, "that prisoners were always treated harshly, to punish them."
"That would be dreadful!"
cried Tollydiggle.
"Isn't one punished enough in knowing he has done wrong?
Don't you wish, Ojo, with all your heart, that you had not been disobedient and broken a Law of Oz?"
"I - I hate to be different from other people," he admitted.
"Yes; one likes to be respected as highly as his neighbors are," said the woman. "When you are tried and found guilty, you will be obliged to make amends, in some way.
I don't know just what Ozma will do to you, because this is the first time one of us has broken a Law; but you may be sure she will be just and merciful.
Here in the Emerald City people are too happy and contented ever to do wrong; but perhaps you came from some faraway corner of our land, and having no love for Ozma carelessly broke one of her Laws."
"Yes," said Ojo, "I've lived all my life in the heart of a lonely forest, where I saw no one but dear Unc Nunkie."
"I thought so," said Tollydiggle.
"But now we have talked enough, so let us play a game until bedtime."
Dorothy Gale was sitting in one of her rooms in the royal palace, while curled up at her feet was a little black dog with a shaggy coat and very bright eyes.
She wore a plain white frock, without any jewels or other ornaments except an emerald-green hair-ribbon, for Dorothy was a simple little girl and had not been in the least spoiled by the magnificence surrounding her.
Once the child had lived on the Kansas prairies, but she seemed marked for adventure, for she had made several trips to the Land of Oz before she came to live there for good.
Her very best friend was the beautiful Ozma of Oz, who loved Dorothy so well that she kept her in her own palace, so as to be near her.
The girl's Uncle Henry and Aunt Em - the only relatives she had in the world - had also been brought here by Ozma and given a pleasant home.
Dorothy knew almost everybody in Oz, and it was she who had discovered the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman and the Cowardly Lion, as well as Tik-Tok the Clockwork Man.
Her life was very pleasant now, and although she had been made a Princess of Oz by her friend Ozma she did not care much to be a Princess and remained as sweet as when she had been plain Dorothy Gale of Kansas.
Dorothy was reading in a book this evening when Jellia Jamb, the favorite servant-maid of the palace, came to say that the Shaggy Man wanted to see her.
"All right," said Dorothy; "tell him to come right up."
"But he has some queer creatures with him - some of the queerest I've ever laid eyes on," reported Jellia.
"Never mind; let 'em all come up," replied Dorothy.
But when the door opened to admit not only the Shaggy Man, but Scraps, the Woozy and the Glass Cat, Dorothy jumped up and looked at her strange visitors in amazement.
The Patchwork Girl was the most curious of all and Dorothy was uncertain at first whether Scraps was really alive or only a dream or a nightmare.
Toto, her dog, slowly uncurled himself and going to the Patchwork Girl sniffed at her inquiringly; but soon he lay down again, as if to say he had no interest in such an irregular creation.
"You're a new one to me," Dorothy said reflectively, addressing the Patchwork Girl.
"I can't imagine where you've come from."
"Who, me?"
asked Scraps, looking around the pretty room instead of at the girl.
"Oh, I came from a bed-quilt, I guess.
That's what they say, anyhow.
Some call it a crazy-quilt and some a patchwork quilt.
But my name is Scraps - and now you know all about me."
"Not quite all," returned Dorothy with a smile.
"I wish you'd tell me how you came to be alive."
"That's an easy job," said Scraps, sitting upon a big upholstered chair and making the springs bounce her up and down. "Margolotte wanted a slave, so she made me out of an old bed-quilt she didn't use. Cotton stuffing, suspender-button eyes, red velvet tongue, pearl beads for teeth.
The Crooked Magician made a Powder of Life, sprinkled me with it and - here I am.
Perhaps you've noticed my different colors.
A very refined and educated gentleman named the Scarecrow, whom I met, told me I am the most beautiful creature in all Oz, and I believe it."
"Oh!
Have you met our Scarecrow, then?"
asked Dorothy, a little puzzled to understand the brief history related.
"Yes; isn't he jolly?"
"The Scarecrow has many good qualities," replied Dorothy.
"But I'm sorry to hear all this 'bout the Crooked Magician.
Ozma'll be mad as hops when she hears he's been doing magic again.
She told him not to."
"He only practices magic for the benefit of his own family," explained Bungle, who was keeping at a respectful distance from the little black dog.
"Dear me," said Dorothy; "I hadn't noticed you before.
Are you glass, or what?"
"I'm glass, and transparent, too, which is more than can be said of some folks," answered the cat.
"Also I have some lovely pink brains; you can see 'em work."
"Oh; is that so?
Come over here and let me see."
The Glass Cat hesitated, eyeing the dog.
"Send that beast away and I will," she said.
"Beast!
Why, that's my dog Toto, an' he's the kindest dog in all the world.
Toto knows a good many things, too; 'most as much as I do, I guess."
"Why doesn't he say anything?"
asked Bungle.
"He can't talk, not being a fairy dog," explained Dorothy.
"He's just a common United States dog; but that's a good deal; and I understand him, and he understands me, just as well as if he could talk."
Toto, at this, got up and rubbed his head softly against Dorothy's hand, which she held out to him, and he looked up into her face as if he had understood every word she had said.
"This cat, Toto," she said to him, "is made of glass, so you mustn't bother it, or chase it, any more than you do my Pink Kitten.
It's prob'ly brittle and might break if it bumped against anything."
"Woof!"
said Toto, and that meant he understood.
The Glass Cat was so proud of her pink brains that she ventured to come close to Dorothy, in order that the girl might "see 'em work."
This was really interesting, but when Dorothy patted the cat she found the glass cold and hard and unresponsive, so she decided at once that Bungle would never do for a pet.
"What do you know about the Crooked Magician who lives on the mountain?"
asked Dorothy.
"He made me," replied the cat; "so I know all about him.
The Patchwork Girl is new - three or four days old - but I've lived with Dr. Pipt for years; and, though I don't much care for him, I will say that he has always refused to work magic for any of the people who come to his house.
He thinks there's no harm in doing magic things for his own family, and he made me out of glass because the meat cats drink too much milk.
He also made Scraps come to life so she could do the housework for his wife Margolotte."
"Then why did you both leave him?"
asked Dorothy.
"I think you'd better let me explain that," interrupted the Shaggy Man, and then he told Dorothy all of Ojo's story and how Unc Nunkie and Margolotte had accidentally been turned to marble by the Liquid of Petrifaction.
Then he related how the boy had started out in search of the things needed to make the magic charm, which would restore the unfortunates to life, and how he had found the Woozy and taken him along because he could not pull the three hairs out of its tail.
Dorothy listened to all this with much interest, and thought that so far Ojo had acted very well.
But when the Shaggy Man told her of the Munchkin boy's arrest by the Soldier with the Green Whiskers, because he was accused of wilfully breaking a Law of Oz, the little girl was greatly shocked.
"What do you s'pose he's done?"
she asked.
"I fear he has picked a six-leaved clover," answered the Shaggy Man, sadly.
"I did not see him do it, and I warned him that to do so was against the Law; but perhaps that is what he did, nevertheless."
"I'm sorry 'bout that," said Dorothy gravely, "for now there will be no one to help his poor uncle and Margolotte 'cept this Patchwork Girl, the Woozy and the Glass Cat."
"Don't mention it," said Scraps.
"That's no affair of mine.
Margolotte and Unc Nunkie are perfect strangers to me, for the moment I came to life they came to marble."
"I see," remarked Dorothy with a sigh of regret; "the woman forgot to give you a heart."
"I'm glad she did," retorted the Patchwork Girl.
"A heart must be a great annoyance to one.
It makes a person feel sad or sorry or devoted or sympathetic - all of which sensations interfere with one's happiness."
"I have a heart," murmured the Glass Cat.
"It's made of a ruby; but I don't imagine I shall let it bother me about helping Unc Nunkie and Margolotte."
"That's a pretty hard heart of yours," said Dorothy.
"And the Woozy, of course - "
"Why, as for me," observed the Woozy, who was reclining on the floor with his legs doubled under him, so that he looked much like a square box, "I have never seen those unfortunate people you are speaking of, and yet I am sorry for them, having at times been unfortunate myself.
When I was shut up in that forest I longed for some one to help me, and by and by Ojo came and did help me.
So I'm willing to help his uncle.
I'm only a stupid beast, Dorothy, but I can't help that, and if you'll tell me what to do to help Ojo and his uncle, I'll gladly do it."
Dorothy walked over and patted the Woozy on his square head.
"You're not pretty," she said, "but I like you.
What are you able to do; anything 'special?"
"I can make my eyes flash fire - real fire - when I'm angry.
When anyone says: 'Krizzle-Kroo' to me I get angry, and then my eyes flash fire."
"I don't see as fireworks could help Ojo's uncle," remarked Dorothy.
"Can you do anything else?"
"I - I thought I had a very terrifying growl," said the Woozy, with hesitation; "but perhaps I was mistaken."
"Yes," said the Shaggy Man, "you were certainly wrong about that."
Then he turned to Dorothy and added: "What will become of the Munchkin boy?"
"I don't know," she said, shaking her head thoughtfully.
"Ozma will see him 'bout it, of course, and then she'll punish him.
But how, I don't know, 'cause no one ever has been punished in Oz since I knew anything about the place.
Too bad, Shaggy Man, isn't it?"
While they were talking Scraps had been roaming around the room and looking at all the pretty things it contained. She had carried Ojo's basket in her hand, until now, when she decided to see what was inside it.
She found the bread and cheese, which she had no use for, and the bundle of charms, which were curious but quite a mystery to her.
Then, turning these over, she came upon the six-leaved clover which the boy had plucked.
Scraps was quick-witted, and although she had no heart she recognized the fact that Ojo was her first friend.
She knew at once that because the boy had taken the clover he had been imprisoned, and she understood that Ojo had given her the basket so they would not find the clover in his possession and have proof of his crime.
So, turning her head to see that no one noticed her, she took the clover from the basket and dropped it into a golden vase that stood on Dorothy's table.
Then she came forward and said to Dorothy:
"I wouldn't care to help Ojo's uncle, but I will help Ojo.
He did not break the Law - no one can prove he did - and that green-whiskered soldier had no right to arrest him."
"Ozma ordered the boy's arrest," said Dorothy, "and of course she knew what she was doing.
But if you can prove Ojo is innocent they will set him free at once."
"They'll have to prove him guilty, won't they?''
asked Scraps.
"I s'pose so."
"Well, they can't do that," declared the Patchwork Girl.
As it was nearly time for Dorothy to dine with Ozma, which she did every evening, she rang for a servant and ordered the Woozy taken to a nice room and given plenty of such food as he liked best.
"That's honey-bees," said the Woozy.
"You can't eat honey-bees, but you'll be given something just as nice," Dorothy told him.
Then she had the Glass Cat taken to another room for the night and the Patchwork Girl she kept in one of her own rooms, for she was much interested in the strange creature and wanted to talk with her again and try to understand her better.
The Shaggy Man had a room of his own in the royal palace, so there he went to change his shaggy suit of clothes for another just as shaggy but not so dusty from travel.
He selected a costume of pea-green and pink satin and velvet, with embroidered shags on all the edges and iridescent pearls for ornaments.
Then he bathed in an alabaster pool and brushed his shaggy hair and whiskers the wrong way to make them still more shaggy.
This accomplished, and arrayed in his splendid shaggy garments, he went to Ozma's banquet hall and found the Scarecrow, the Wizard and Dorothy already assembled there.
The Scarecrow had made a quick trip and returned to the Emerald City with his left ear freshly painted.
A moment later, while they all stood in waiting, a servant threw open a door, the orchestra struck up a tune and Ozma of Oz entered.
Much has been told and written concerning the beauty of person and character of this sweet girl Ruler of the Land of Oz - the richest, the happiest and most delightful fairyland of which we have any knowledge.
Yet with all her queenly qualities Ozma was a real girl and enjoyed the things in life that other real girls enjoy.
When she sat on her splendid emerald throne in the great Throne Room of her palace and made laws and settled disputes and tried to keep all her subjects happy and contented, she was as dignified and demure as any queen might be; but when she had thrown aside her jeweled robe of state and her sceptre, and had retired to her private apartments, the girl - joyous, light-hearted and free - replaced the sedate Ruler.
In the banquet hall to-night were gathered only old and trusted friends, so here Ozma was herself - a mere girl.
She greeted Dorothy with a kiss, the Shaggy Man with a smile, the little old Wizard with a friendly handshake and then she pressed the Scarecrow's stuffed arm and cried merrily:
"What a lovely left ear!
Why, it's a hundred times better than the old one."
"I'm glad you like it," replied the Scarecrow, well pleased.
"Jinjur did a neat job, didn't she?
And my hearing is now perfect.
Isn't it wonderful what a little paint will do, if it's properly applied?"
"It really is wonderful," she agreed, as they all took their seats; "but the Sawhorse must have made his legs twinkle to have carried you so far in one day.
I didn't expect you back before to-morrow, at the earliest."
"Well," said the Scarecrow, "I met a charming girl on the road and wanted to see more of her, so I hurried back."
Ozma laughed.
"I know," she returned; "it's the Patchwork Girl.
She is certainly bewildering, if not strictly beautiful."
"Have you seen her, then?"
the straw man eagerly asked.
"Only in my Magic Picture, which shows me all scenes of interest in the Land of Oz."
"I fear the picture didn't do her justice," said the Scarecrow.
"It seemed to me that nothing could be more gorgeous," declared Ozma.
"Whoever made that patchwork quilt, from which Scraps was formed, must have selected the gayest and brightest bits of cloth that ever were woven."
"I am glad you like her," said the Scarecrow in a satisfied tone. Although the straw man did not eat, not being made so he could, he often dined with Ozma and her companions, merely for the pleasure of talking with them.
He sat at the table and had a napkin and plate, but the servants knew better than to offer him food.
After a little while he asked: "Where is the Patchwork Girl now?"
"In my room," replied Dorothy.
"I've taken a fancy to her; she's so queer and - and - uncommon."
"She's half crazy, I think," added the Shaggy Man.
"But she is so beautiful!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, as if that fact disarmed all criticism. They all laughed at his enthusiasm, but the Scarecrow was quite serious. Seeing that he was interested in Scraps they forbore to say anything against her.
The little band of friends Ozma had gathered around her was so quaintly assorted that much care must be exercised to avoid hurting their feelings or making any one of them unhappy.
It was this considerate kindness that held them close friends and enabled them to enjoy one another's society.
Another thing they avoided was conversing on unpleasant subjects, and for that reason Ojo and his troubles were not mentioned during the dinner.
The Shaggy Man, however, related his adventures with the monstrous plants which had seized and enfolded the travelers, and told how he had robbed Chiss, the giant porcupine, of the quills which it was accustomed to throw at people.
Both Dorothy and Ozma were pleased with this exploit and thought it served Chiss right.
Then they talked of the Woozy, which was the most remarkable animal any of them had ever before seen - except, perhaps, the live Sawhorse.
Ozma had never known that her dominions contained such a thing as a Woozy, there being but one in existence and this being confined in his forest for many years.
Dorothy said she believed the Woozy was a good beast, honest and faithful; but she added that she did not care much for the Glass Cat.
"Still," said the Shaggy Man, "the Glass Cat is very pretty and if she were not so conceited over her pink brains no one would object to her as a companion."
The Wizard had been eating silently until now, when he looked up and remarked:
"That Powder of Life which is made by the Crooked Magician is really a wonderful thing.
But Dr. Pipt does not know its true value and he uses it in the most foolish ways."
"I must see about that," said Ozma, gravely.
Then she smiled again and continued in a lighter tone: "It was Dr. Pipt's famous Powder of Life that enabled me to become the Ruler of Oz."
"I've never heard that story," said the Shaggy Man, looking at Ozma questioningly.
"Well, when I was a baby girl I was stolen by an old Witch named Mombi and transformed into a boy," began the girl Ruler.
"I did not know who I was and when I grew big enough to work, the Witch made me wait upon her and carry wood for the fire and hoe in the garden.
One day she came back from a journey bringing some of the Powder of Life, which Dr. Pipt had given her.
I had made a pumpkin-headed man and set it up in her path to frighten her, for I was fond of fun and hated the Witch.
But she knew what the figure was and to test her Powder of Life she sprinkled some of it on the man I had made.
It came to life and is now our dear friend Jack Pumpkinhead.
That night I ran away with Jack to escape punishment, and I took old Mombi's Powder of Life with me.
During our journey we came upon a wooden Sawhorse standing by the road and I used the magic powder to bring it to life.
The Sawhorse has been with me ever since.
When I got to the Emerald City the good Sorceress, Glinda, knew who I was and restored me to my proper person, when I became the rightful Ruler of this land.
So you see had not old Mombi brought home the Powder of Life I might never have run away from her and become Ozma of Oz, nor would we have had Jack Pumpkinhead and the Sawhorse to comfort and amuse us."
That story interested the Shaggy Man very much, as well as the others, who had often heard it before.
The dinner being now concluded, they all went to Ozma's drawing-room, where they passed a pleasant evening before it came time to retire.
The next morning the Soldier with the Green Whiskers went to the prison and took Ojo away to the royal palace, where he was summoned to appear before the girl Ruler for judgment.
Again the soldier put upon the boy the jeweled handcuffs and white prisoner's robe with the peaked top and holes for the eyes.
Ojo was so ashamed, both of his disgrace and the fault he had committed, that he was glad to be covered up in this way, so that people could not see him or know who he was.
He followed the Soldier with the Green Whiskers very willingly, anxious that his fate might be decided as soon as possible.
The inhabitants of the Emerald City were polite people and never jeered at the unfortunate; but it was so long since they had seen a prisoner that they cast many curious looks toward the boy and many of them hurried away to the royal palace to be present during the trial.
When Ojo was escorted into the great Throne Room of the palace he found hundreds of people assembled there. In the magnificent emerald throne, which sparkled with countless jewels, sat Ozma of Oz in her Robe of State, which was embroidered with emeralds and pearls.
On her right, but a little lower, was Dorothy, and on her left the Scarecrow.
Still lower, but nearly in front of Ozma, sat the wonderful Wizard of Oz and on a small table beside him was the golden vase from Dorothy's room, into which Scraps had dropped the stolen clover.
At Ozma's feet crouched two enormous beasts, each the largest and most powerful of its kind.
Although these beasts were quite free, no one present was alarmed by them; for the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger were well known and respected in the Emerald City and they always guarded the Ruler when she held high court in the Throne Room.
There was still another beast present, but this one Dorothy held in her arms, for it was her constant companion, the little dog Toto.
Toto knew the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger and often played and romped with them, for they were good friends.
Seated on ivory chairs before Ozma, with a clear space between them and the throne, were many of the nobility of the Emerald City, lords and ladies in beautiful costumes, and officials of the kingdom in the royal uniforms of Oz.
Behind these courtiers were others of less importance, filling the great hall to the very doors.
At the same moment that the Soldier with the Green Whiskers arrived with Ojo, the Shaggy Man entered from a side door, escorting the Patchwork Girl, the Woozy and the Glass Cat.
All these came to the vacant space before the throne and stood facing the Ruler.
"Hullo, Ojo," said Scraps; "how are you?"
"All right," he replied; but the scene awed the boy and his voice trembled a little with fear.
Nothing could awe the Patchwork Girl, and although the Woozy was somewhat uneasy in these splendid surroundings the Glass Cat was delighted with the sumptuousness of the court and the impressiveness of the occasion - pretty big words but quite expressive.
At a sign from Ozma the soldier removed Ojo's white robe and the boy stood face to face with the girl who was to decide his punishment.
He saw at a glance how lovely and sweet she was, and his heart gave a bound of joy, for he hoped she would be merciful.
Ozma sat looking at the prisoner a long time.
Then she said gently:
"One of the Laws of Oz forbids anyone to pick a six-leaved clover.
You are accused of having broken this Law, even after you had been warned not to do so."
Ojo hung his head and while he hesitated how to reply the Patchwork Girl stepped forward and spoke for him.
"All this fuss is about nothing at all," she said, facing Ozma unabashed. "You can't prove he picked the six-leaved clover, so you've no right to accuse him of it.
Search him, if you like, but you won't find the clover; look in his basket and you'll find it's not there.
He hasn't got it, so I demand that you set this poor Munchkin boy free."
The people of Oz listened to this defiance in amazement and wondered at the queer Patchwork Girl who dared talk so boldly to their Ruler.
But Ozma sat silent and motionless and it was the little Wizard who answered Scraps.
"So the clover hasn't been picked, eh?" he said. "I think it has. I think the boy hid it in his basket, and then gave the basket to you.
I also think you dropped the clover into this vase, which stood in Princess Dorothy's room, hoping to get rid of it so it would not prove the boy guilty.
You're a stranger here, Miss Patches, and so you don't know that nothing can be hidden from our powerful Ruler's Magic Picture - nor from the watchful eyes of the humble Wizard of Oz.
Look, all of you!"
With these words he waved his hands toward the vase on the table, which Scraps now noticed for the first time.
From the mouth of the vase a plant sprouted, slowly growing before their eyes until it became a beautiful bush, and on the topmost branch appeared the six-leaved clover which Ojo had unfortunately picked.
The Patchwork Girl looked at the clover and said: "Oh, so you've found it.
Very well; prove he picked it, if you can."
Ozma turned to Ojo.
"Did you pick the six-leaved clover?"
she asked.
"Yes," he replied.
"I knew it was against the Law, but I wanted to save Unc Nunkie and I was afraid if I asked your consent to pick it you would refuse me."
"What caused you to think that?"
asked the Ruler.
"Why, it seemed to me a foolish law, unjust and unreasonable. Even now I can see no harm in picking a six-leaved clover.
And I - I had not seen the Emerald City, then, nor you, and I thought a girl who would make such a silly Law would not be likely to help anyone in trouble."
Ozma regarded him musingly, her chin resting upon her hand; but she was not angry.
On the contrary she smiled a little at her thoughts and then grew sober again.
"I suppose a good many laws seem foolish to those people who do not understand them," she said; "but no law is ever made without some purpose, and that purpose is usually to protect all the people and guard their welfare.
As you are a stranger, I will explain this Law which to you seems so foolish.
Years ago there were many Witches and Magicians in the Land of Oz, and one of the things they often used in making their magic charms and transformations was a six-leaved clover.
These Witches and Magicians caused so much trouble among my people, often using their powers for evil rather than good, that I decided to forbid anyone to practice magic or sorcery except Glinda the Good and her assistant, the Wizard of Oz, both of whom I can trust to use their arts only to benefit my people and to make them happier.
Since I issued that Law the Land of Oz has been far more peaceful and quiet; but I learned that some of the Witches and Magicians were still practicing magic on the sly and using the six-leaved clovers to make their potions and charms.
Therefore I made another Law forbidding anyone from plucking a six-leaved clover or from gathering other plants and herbs which the Witches boil in their kettles to work magic with.
That has almost put an end to wicked sorcery in our land, so you see the Law was not a foolish one, but wise and just; and, in any event, it is wrong to disobey a Law."
Ojo knew she was right and felt greatly mortified to realize he had acted and spoken so ridiculously.
But he raised his head and looked Ozma in the face, saying:
"I am sorry I have acted wrongly and broken your Law.
I did it to save Unc Nunkie, and thought I would not be found out.
But I am guilty of this act and whatever punishment you think I deserve I will suffer willingly."
Ozma smiled more brightly, then, and nodded graciously.
"You are forgiven," she said.
"For, although you have committed a serious fault, you are now penitent and I think you have been punished enough.
Soldier, release Ojo the Lucky and - "
"I beg your pardon; I'm Ojo the Unlucky," said the boy.
"At this moment you are lucky," said she.
"Release him, Soldier, and let him go free."
The people were glad to hear Ozma's decree and murmured their approval.
As the royal audience was now over, they began to leave the Throne Room and soon there were none remaining except Ojo and his friends and Ozma and her favorites.
The girl Ruler now asked Ojo to sit down and tell her all his story, which he did, beginning at the time he had left his home in the forest and ending with his arrival at the Emerald City and his arrest.
Ozma listened attentively and was thoughtful for some moments after the boy had finished speaking.
Then she said:
"The Crooked Magician was wrong to make the Glass Cat and the Patchwork Girl, for it was against the Law.
And if he had not unlawfully kept the bottle of Liquid of Petrifaction standing on his shelf, the accident to his wife Margolotte and to Unc Nunkie could not have occurred.
I can understand, however, that Ojo, who loves his uncle, will be unhappy unless he can save him.
Also I feel it is wrong to leave those two victims standing as marble statues, when they ought to be alive.
So I propose we allow Dr. Pipt to make the magic charm which will save them, and that we assist Ojo to find the things he is seeking.
What do you think, Wizard?"
"That is perhaps the best thing to do," replied the Wizard.
"But after the Crooked Magician has restored those poor people to life you must take away his magic powers."
"I will," promised Ozma.
"Now tell me, please, what magic things must you find?"
continued the Wizard, addressing Ojo.
"The three hairs from the Woozy's tail I have," said the boy.
"That is, I have the Woozy, and the hairs are in his tail.
The six-leaved clover I - I - "
"You may take it and keep it," said Ozma.
"That will not be breaking the Law, for it is already picked, and the crime of picking it is forgiven."
"Thank you!"
cried Ojo gratefully.
Then he continued: "The next thing I must find is a gill of water from a dark well."
The Wizard shook his head.
"That," said he, "will be a hard task, but if you travel far enough you may discover it."
"I am willing to travel for years, if it will save Unc Nunkie," declared Ojo, earnestly.
"Then you'd better begin your journey at once," advised the Wizard.
Dorothy had been listening with interest to this conversation.
Now she turned to Ozma and asked: "May I go with Ojo, to help him?"
"Would you like to?"
returned Ozma.
"Yes.
I know Oz pretty well, but Ojo doesn't know it at all.
I'm sorry for his uncle and poor Margolotte and I'd like to help save them.
May I go?"
"If you wish to," replied Ozma.
"If Dorothy goes, then I must go to take care of her," said the Scarecrow, decidedly.
"A dark well can only be discovered in some out-of-the-way place, and there may be dangers there."
"You have my permission to accompany Dorothy," said Ozma.
"And while you are gone I will take care of the Patchwork Girl."
"I'll take care of myself," announced Scraps, "for I'm going with the Scarecrow and Dorothy.
I promised Ojo to help him find the things he wants and I'll stick to my promise."
"Very well," replied Ozma.
"But I see no need for Ojo to take the Glass Cat and the Woozy."
"I prefer to remain here," said the cat.
"I've nearly been nicked half a dozen times, already, and if they're going into dangers it's best for me to keep away from them."
"Let Jellia Jamb keep her till Ojo returns," suggested Dorothy.
"We won't need to take the Woozy, either, but he ought to be saved because of the three hairs in his tail."
"Better take me along," said the Woozy.
"My eyes can flash fire, you know, and I can growl - a little."
"I'm sure you'll be safer here," Ozma decided, and the Woozy made no further objection to the plan.
After consulting together they decided that Ojo and his party should leave the very next day to search for the gill of water from a dark well, so they now separated to make preparations for the journey.
Ozma gave the Munchkin boy a room in the palace for that night and the afternoon he passed with Dorothy - getting acquainted, as she said - and receiving advice from the Shaggy Man as to where they must go.
The Shaggy Man had wandered in many parts of Oz, and so had Dorothy, for that matter, yet neither of them knew where a dark well was to be found.
"If such a thing is anywhere in the settled parts of Oz," said Dorothy, "we'd prob'ly have heard of it long ago.
If it's in the wild parts of the country, no one there would need a dark well.
P'raps there isn't such a thing."
"Oh, there must be!"
returned Ojo, positively; "or else the recipe of Dr. Pipt wouldn't call for it."
"That's true," agreed Dorothy; "and, if it's anywhere in the Land of Oz, we're bound to find it."
"Well, we're bound to search for it, anyhow," said the Scarecrow.
"As for finding it, we must trust to luck."
"Don't do that," begged Ojo, earnestly.
"I'm called Ojo the Unlucky, you know."
A day's journey from the Emerald City brought the little band of adventurers to the home of Jack Pumpkinhead, which was a house formed from the shell of an immense pumpkin. Jack had made it himself and was very proud of it.
There was a door, and several windows, and through the top was stuck a stovepipe that led from a small stove inside.
The door was reached by a flight of three steps and there was a good floor on which was arranged some furniture that was quite comfortable.
It is certain that Jack Pumpkinhead might have had a much finer house to live in had he wanted it, for Ozma loved the stupid fellow, who had been her earliest companion; but Jack preferred his pumpkin house, as it matched himself very well, and in this he was not so stupid, after all.
The body of this remarkable person was made of wood, branches of trees of various sizes having been used for the purpose. This wooden framework was covered by a red shirt - with white spots in it - blue trousers, a yellow vest, a jacket of green-and-gold and stout leather shoes.
The neck was a sharpened stick on which the pumpkin head was set, and the eyes, ears, nose and mouth were carved on the skin of the pumpkin, very like a child's jack-o'-lantern.
The house of this interesting creation stood in the center of a vast pumpkin-field, where the vines grew in profusion and bore pumpkins of extraordinary size as well as those which were smaller.
Some of the pumpkins now ripening on the vines were almost as large as Jack's house, and he told Dorothy he intended to add another pumpkin to his mansion.
The travelers were cordially welcomed to this quaint domicile and invited to pass the night there, which they had planned to do.
The Patchwork Girl was greatly interested in Jack and examined him admiringly.
"You are quite handsome," she said; "but not as really beautiful as the Scarecrow."
Jack turned, at this, to examine the Scarecrow critically, and his old friend slyly winked one painted eye at him.
"There is no accounting for tastes," remarked the Pumpkinhead, with a sigh. "An old crow once told me I was very fascinating, but of course the bird might have been mistaken.
Yet I have noticed that the crows usually avoid the Scarecrow, who is a very honest fellow, in his way, but stuffed.
I am not stuffed, you will observe; my body is good solid hickory."
"I adore stuffing," said the Patchwork Girl.
"Well, as for that, my head is stuffed with pumpkin-seeds," declared Jack.
"I use them for brains, and when they are fresh I am intellectual.
Just now, I regret to say, my seeds are rattling a bit, so I must soon get another head."
"Oh; do you change your head?"
asked Ojo.
"To be sure.
Pumpkins are not permanent, more's the pity, and in time they spoil.
That is why I grow such a great field of pumpkins - that I may select a new head whenever necessary."
"Who carves the faces on them?"
inquired the boy.
"I do that myself.
I lift off my old head, place it on a table before me, and use the face for a pattern to go by.
Sometimes the faces I carve are better than others - more expressive and cheerful, you know - but I think they average very well."
Before she had started on the journey Dorothy had packed a knapsack with the things she might need, and this knapsack the Scarecrow carried strapped to his back. The little girl wore a plain gingham dress and a checked sunbonnet, as she knew they were best fitted for travel.
Ojo also had brought along his basket, to which Ozma had added a bottle of "Square Meal Tablets" and some fruit.
But Jack Pumpkinhead grew a lot of things in his garden besides pumpkins, so he cooked for them a fine vegetable soup and gave Dorothy, Ojo and Toto, the only ones who found it necessary to eat, a pumpkin pie and some green cheese.
For beds they must use the sweet dried grasses which Jack had strewn along one side of the room, but that satisfied Dorothy and Ojo very well.
Toto, of course, slept beside his little mistress.
The Scarecrow, Scraps and the Pumpkinhead were tireless and had no need to sleep, so they sat up and talked together all night; but they stayed outside the house, under the bright stars, and talked in low tones so as not to disturb the sleepers.
During the conversation the Scarecrow explained their quest for a dark well, and asked Jack's advice where to find it.
The Pumpkinhead considered the matter gravely.
"That is going to be a difficult task," said he, "and if I were you I'd take any ordinary well and enclose it, so as to make it dark."
"I fear that wouldn't do," replied the Scarecrow.
"The well must be naturally dark, and the water must never have seen the light of day, for otherwise the magic charm might not work at all."
"How much of the water do you need?"
asked Jack.
"A gill."
"How much is a gill?"
"Why - a gill is a gill, of course," answered the Scarecrow, who did not wish to display his ignorance.
"I know!"
cried Scraps.
"Jack and Jill went up the hill to fetch - "
"No, no; that's wrong," interrupted the Scarecrow.
"There are two kinds of gills, I think; one is a girl, and the other is - "
"A gillyflower," said Jack.
"No; a measure."
"How big a measure?"
"Well, I'll ask Dorothy."
So next morning they asked Dorothy, and she said:
"I don't just know how much a gill is, but I've brought along a gold flask that holds a pint.
That's more than a gill, I'm sure, and the Crooked Magician may measure it to suit himself.
But the thing that's bothering us most, Jack, is to find the well."
Jack gazed around the landscape, for he was standing in the doorway of his house.
"This is a flat country, so you won't find any dark wells here," said he.
"You must go into the mountains, where rocks and caverns are."
"And where is that?"
asked Ojo.
"In the Quadling Country, which lies south of here," replied the Scarecrow.
"I've known all along that we must go to the mountains."
"So have I," said Dorothy.
"But - goodness me! - the Quadling Country is full of dangers," declared Jack.
"I've never been there myself, but - "
"I have," said the Scarecrow.
"I've faced the dreadful Hammerheads, which have no arms and butt you like a goat; and I've faced the Fighting Trees, which bend down their branches to pound and whip you, and had many other adventures there."
"It's a wild country," remarked Dorothy, soberly, "and if we go there we're sure to have troubles of our own.
But I guess we'll have to go, if we want that gill of water from the dark well."
So they said good-bye to the Pumpkinhead and resumed their travels, heading now directly toward the South Country, where mountains and rocks and caverns and forests of great trees abounded.
This part of the Land of Oz, while it belonged to Ozma and owed her allegiance, was so wild and secluded that many queer peoples hid in its jungles and lived in their own way, without even a knowledge that they had a Ruler in the Emerald City.
If they were left alone, these creatures never troubled the inhabitants of the rest of Oz, but those who invaded their domains encountered many dangers from them.
It was a two days journey from Jack Pumkinhead's house to the edge of the Quadling Country, for neither Dorothy nor Ojo could walk very fast and they often stopped by the wayside to rest.
The first night they slept on the broad fields, among the buttercups and daisies, and the Scarecrow covered the children with a gauze blanket taken from his knapsack, so they would not be chilled by the night air.
Toward evening of the second day they reached a sandy plain where walking was difficult; but some distance before them they saw a group of palm trees, with many curious black dots under them; so they trudged bravely on to reach that place by dark and spend the night under the shelter of the trees.
The black dots grew larger as they advanced and although the light was dim Dorothy thought they looked like big kettles turned upside down.
Just beyond this place a jumble of huge, jagged rocks lay scattered, rising to the mountains behind them.
Our travelers preferred to attempt to climb these rocks by daylight, and they realized that for a time this would be their last night on the plains.
Twilight had fallen by the time they came to the trees, beneath which were the black, circular objects they had marked from a distance. Dozens of them were scattered around and Dorothy bent near to one, which was about as tall as she was, to examine it more closely.
As she did so the top flew open and out popped a dusky creature, rising its length into the air and then plumping down upon the ground just beside the little girl.
Another and another popped out of the circular, pot-like dwelling, while from all the other black objects came popping more creatures - very like jumping-jacks when their boxes are unhooked - until fully a hundred stood gathered around our little group of travelers.
By this time Dorothy had discovered they were people, tiny and curiously formed, but still people. Their skins were dusky and their hair stood straight up, like wires, and was brilliant scarlet in color.
Their bodies were bare except for skins fastened around their waists and they wore bracelets on their ankles and wrists, and necklaces, and great pendant earrings.
Toto crouched beside his mistress and wailed as if he did not like these strange creatures a bit. Scraps began to mutter something about "hoppity, poppity, jumpity, dump!" but no one paid any attention to her.
Ojo kept close to the Scarecrow and the Scarecrow kept close to Dorothy; but the little girl turned to the queer creatures and asked:
"Who are you?"
They answered this question all together, in a sort of chanting chorus, the words being as follows:
"We're the jolly Tottenhots; We do not like the day, But in the night 'tis our delight To gambol, skip and play.
"We hate the sun and from it run, The moon is cool and clear, So on this spot each Tottenhot Waits for it to appear.
"We're ev'ry one chock full of fun, And full of mischief, too; But if you're gay and with us play We'll do no harm to you.
"Glad to meet you, Tottenhots," said the Scarecrow solemnly.
"But you mustn't expect us to play with you all night, for we've traveled all day and some of us are tired."
"And we never gamble," added the Patchwork Girl.
"It's against the Law."
These remarks were greeted with shouts of laughter by the impish creatures and one seized the Scarecrow's arm and was astonished to find the straw man whirl around so easily. So the Tottenhot raised the Scarecrow high in the air and tossed him over the heads of the crowd.
Some one caught him and tossed him back, and so with shouts of glee they continued throwing the Scarecrow here and there, as if he had been a basket-ball.
Presently another imp seized Scraps and began to throw her about, in the same way.
They found her a little heavier than the Scarecrow but still light enough to be tossed like a sofa-cushion, and they were enjoying the sport immensely when Dorothy, angry and indignant at the treatment her friends were receiving, rushed among the Tottenhots and began slapping and pushing them until she had rescued the Scarecrow and the Patchwork Girl and held them close on either side of her.
Perhaps she would not have accomplished this victory so easily had not Toto helped her, barking and snapping at the bare legs of the imps until they were glad to flee from his attack.
As for Ojo, some of the creatures had attempted to toss him, also, but finding his body too heavy they threw him to the ground and a row of the imps sat on him and held him from assisting Dorothy in her battle.
The little brown folks were much surprised at being attacked by the girl and the dog, and one or two who had been slapped hardest began to cry.
Then suddenly they gave a shout, all together, and disappeared in a flash into their various houses, the tops of which closed with a series of pops that sounded like a bunch of firecrackers being exploded.
The adventurers now found themselves alone, and Dorothy asked anxiously:
"Is anybody hurt?"
"Not me," answered the Scarecrow.
"They have given my straw a good shaking up and taken all the lumps out of it.
I am now in splendid condition and am really obliged to the Tottenhots for their kind treatment."
"I feel much the same way," said Scraps.
"My cotton stuffing had sagged a good deal with the day's walking and they've loosened it up until I feel as plump as a sausage.
But the play was a little rough and I'd had quite enough of it when you interfered."
"Six of them sat on me," said Ojo, "but as they are so little they didn't hurt me much."
Just then the roof of the house in front of them opened and a Tottenhot stuck his head out, very cautiously, and looked at the strangers.
"Can't you take a joke?"
he asked, reproachfully; "haven't you any fun in you at all?"
"If I had such a quality," replied the Scarecrow, "your people would have knocked it out of me.
But I don't bear grudges.
I forgive you."
"So do I," added Scraps.
"That is, if you behave yourselves after this."
"It was just a little rough-house, that's all," said the Tottenhot. "But the question is not if we will behave, but if you will behave?
We can't be shut up here all night, because this is our time to play; nor do we care to come out and be chewed up by a savage beast or slapped by an angry girl.
That slapping hurts like sixty; some of my folks are crying about it.
So here's the proposition: you let us alone and we'll let you alone."
"You began it," declared Dorothy.
"Well, you ended it, so we won't argue the matter.
May we come out again?
Or are you still cruel and slappy?"
"Tell you what we'll do," said Dorothy.
"We're all tired and want to sleep until morning.
If you'll let us get into your house, and stay there until daylight, you can play outside all you want to."
"That's a bargain!" cried the Tottenhot eagerly, and he gave a queer whistle that brought his people popping out of their houses on all sides.
When the house before them was vacant, Dorothy and Ojo leaned over the hole and looked in, but could see nothing because it was so dark.
But if the Tottenhots slept there all day the children thought they could sleep there at night, so Ojo lowered himself down and found it was not very deep.
"There's a soft cushion all over," said he.
"Come on in."
Dorothy handed Toto to the boy and then climbed in herself.
After her came Scraps and the Scarecrow, who did not wish to sleep but preferred to keep out of the way of the mischievous Tottenhots.
There seemed no furniture in the round den, but soft cushions were strewn about the floor and these they found made very comfortable beds. They did not close the hole in the roof but left it open to admit air.
It also admitted the shouts and ceaseless laughter of the impish Tottenhots as they played outside, but Dorothy and Ojo, being weary from their journey, were soon fast asleep.
Toto kept an eye open, however, and uttered low, threatening growls whenever the racket made by the creatures outside became too boisterous; and the Scarecrow and the Patchwork Girl sat leaning against the wall and talked in whispers all night long.
No one disturbed the travelers until daylight, when in popped the Tottenhot who owned the place and invited them to vacate his premises.
As they were preparing to leave, Dorothy asked: "Can you tell us where there is a dark well?"
"Never heard of such a thing," said the Tottenhot.
"We live our lives in the dark, mostly, and sleep in the daytime; but we've never seen a dark well, or anything like one."
"Does anyone live on those mountains beyond here?"
asked the Scarecrow.
"Lots of people.
But you'd better not visit them.
We never go there," was the reply.
"What are the people like?"
Dorothy inquired.
"Can't say.
We've been told to keep away from the mountain paths, and so we obey.
This sandy desert is good enough for us, and we're not disturbed here," declared the Tottenhot.
So they left the man snuggling down to sleep in his dusky dwelling, and went out into the sunshine, taking the path that led toward the rocky places.
They soon found it hard climbing, for the rocks were uneven and full of sharp points and edges, and now there was no path at all.
Clambering here and there among the boulders they kept steadily on, gradually rising higher and higher until finally they came to a great rift in a part of the mountain, where the rock seemed to have split in two and left high walls on either side.
"S'pose we go this way," suggested Dorothy; "it's much easier walking than to climb over the hills."
"How about that sign?"
asked Ojo.
"What sign?"
she inquired.
The Munchkin boy pointed to some words painted on the wall of rock beside them, which Dorothy had not noticed.
The words read:
The girl eyed this sign a moment and turned to the Scarecrow, asking:
"Who is Yoop; or what is Yoop?"
The straw man shook his head.
Then looked at Toto and the dog said "Woof!"
"Only way to find out is to go on," said Scraps.
This being quite true, they went on.
As they proceeded, the walls of rock on either side grew higher and higher.
Presently they came upon another sign which read:
"Why, as for that," remarked Dorothy, "if Yoop is a captive there's no need to beware of him.
Whatever Yoop happens to be, I'd much rather have him a captive than running around loose."
"So had I," agreed the Scarecrow, with a nod of his painted head.
"Still," said Scraps, reflectively:
"Yoop-te-hoop-te-loop-te-goop!
Who put noodles in the soup?
We may beware but we don't care, And dare go where we scare the Yoop."
"Dear me!
Aren't you feeling a little queer, just now?"
Dorothy asked the Patchwork Girl.
"Not queer, but crazy," said Ojo.
"When she says those things I'm sure her brains get mixed somehow and work the wrong way.
"I don't see why we are told to beware the Yoop unless he is dangerous," observed the Scarecrow in a puzzled tone.
"Never mind; we'll find out all about him when we get to where he is," replied the little girl.
The narrow canyon turned and twisted this way and that, and the rift was so small that they were able to touch both walls at the same time by stretching out their arms.
Toto had run on ahead, frisking playfully, when suddenly he uttered a sharp bark of fear and came running back to them with his tail between his legs, as dogs do when they are frightened.
"Ah," said the Scarecrow, who was leading the way, "we must be near Yoop."
Just then, as he rounded a sharp turn, the Straw man stopped so suddenly that all the others bumped against him.
"What is it?"
asked Dorothy, standing on tip-toes to look over his shoulder.
But then she saw what it was and cried "Oh!"
in a tone of astonishment.
In one of the rock walls&#8212;that at their left&#8212;was hollowed a great cavern, in front of which was a row of thick iron bars, the tops and bottoms being firmly fixed in the solid rock.
Over this cavern was a big sign, which Dorothy read with much curiosity, speaking the words aloud that all might know what they said:
"MISTER YOOP&#8212;HIS CAVE
The Largest Untamed Giant in Captivity.
Height, 21 Feet.&#8212;(And yet he has but 2 feet.)
Weight, 1640 Pounds.&#8212;(But he waits all the time.)
Age, 400 Years 'and Up' (as they say in the
Department Store advertisements).
Temper, Fierce and Ferocious.&#8212;(Except when asleep.)
Appetite, Ravenous.&#8212;(Prefers Meat People and
Orange Marmalade.)
STRANGERS APPROACHING THIS CAVE DO SO AT THEIR
OWN PERIL!
P.S.&#8212;Don't feed the Giant yourself."
"Very well," said Ojo, with a sigh; "let's go back."
"It's a long way back," declared Dorothy.
"So it is," remarked the Scarecrow, "and it means a tedious climb over those sharp rocks if we can't use this passage.
I think it will be best to run by the Giant's cave as fast as we can go.
Mister Yoop seems to be asleep just now."
But the Giant wasn't asleep. He suddenly appeared at the front of his cavern, seized the iron bars in his great hairy hands and shook them until they rattled in their sockets.
Yoop was so tall that our friends had to tip their heads way back to look into his face, and they noticed he was dressed all in pink velvet, with silver buttons and braid.
The Giant's boots were of pink leather and had tassels on them and his hat was decorated with an enormous pink ostrich feather, carefully curled.
"Yo-ho!"
he said in a deep bass voice; "I smell dinner."
"I think you are mistaken," replied the Scarecrow.
"There is no orange marmalade around here."
"Ah, but I eat other things," asserted Mister Yoop.
"That is, I eat them when I can get them.
But this is a lonely place, and no good meat has passed by my cave for many years; so I'm hungry."
"Haven't you eaten anything in many years?"
asked Dorothy.
"Nothing except six ants and a monkey.
I thought the monkey would taste like meat people, but the flavor was different.
I hope you will taste better, for you seem plump and tender."
"Oh, I'm not going to be eaten," said Dorothy.
"Why not?"
"I shall keep out of your way," she answered.
"How heartless!" wailed the Giant, shaking the bars again. "Consider how many years it is since I've eaten a single plump little girl! They tell me meat is going up, but if I can manage to catch you I'm sure it will soon be going down.
And I'll catch you if I can."
With this the Giant pushed his big arms, which looked like tree-trunks (except that tree-trunks don't wear pink velvet) between the iron bars, and the arms were so long that they touched the opposite wall of the rock passage.
Then he extended them as far as he could reach toward our travelers and found he could almost touch the Scarecrow&#8212;but not quite.
"Come a little nearer, please," begged the Giant.
"I'm a Scarecrow."
"A Scarecrow?
Ugh!
I don't care a straw for a scarecrow.
Who is that bright-colored delicacy behind you?"
"Me?"
asked Scraps.
"I'm a Patchwork Girl, and I'm stuffed with cotton."
"Dear me," sighed the Giant in a disappointed tone; "that reduces my dinner from four to two&#8212;and the dog.
I'll save the dog for dessert."
Toto growled, keeping a good distance away.
"Back up," said the Scarecrow to those behind him.
"Let us go back a little way and talk this over."
So they turned and went around the bend in the passage, where they were out of sight of the cave and Mister Yoop could not hear them.
"My idea," began the Scarecrow, when they had halted, "is to make a dash past the cave, going on a run."
"He'd grab us," said Dorothy.
"Well, he can't grab but one at a time, and I'll go first.
As soon as he grabs me the rest of you can slip past him, out of his reach, and he will soon let me go because I am not fit to eat."
They decided to try this plan and Dorothy took Toto in her arms, so as to protect him. She followed just after the Scarecrow. Then came Ojo, with Scraps the last of the four.
Their hearts beat a little faster than usual as they again approached the Giant's cave, this time moving swiftly forward.
It turned out about the way the Scarecrow had planned. Mister Yoop was quite astonished to see them come flying toward him, and thrusting his arms between the bars he seized the Scarecrow in a firm grip.
In the next instant he realized, from the way the straw crunched between his fingers, that he had captured the non-eatable man, but during that instant of delay Dorothy and Ojo had slipped by the Giant and were out of reach.
Uttering a howl of rage the monster threw the Scarecrow after them with one hand and grabbed Scraps with the other.
The poor Scarecrow went whirling through the air and so cleverly was he aimed that he struck Ojo's back and sent the boy tumbling head over heels, and he tripped Dorothy and sent her, also, sprawling upon the ground.
Toto flew out of the little girl's arms and landed some distance ahead, and all were so dazed that it was a moment before they could scramble to their feet again.
When they did so they turned to look toward the Giant's cave, and at that moment the ferocious Mister Yoop threw the Patchwork Girl at them.
Down went all three again, in a heap, with Scraps on top. The Giant roared so terribly that for a time they were afraid he had broken loose; but he hadn't.
So they sat in the road and looked at one another in a rather bewildered way, and then began to feel glad.
"We did it!"
exclaimed the Scarecrow, with satisfaction.
"And now we are free to go on our way."
"Mister Yoop is very impolite," declared Scraps.
"He jarred me terribly.
It's lucky my stitches are so fine and strong, for otherwise such harsh treatment might rip me up the back."
"Allow me to apologize for the Giant," said the Scarecrow, raising the Patchwork Girl to her feet and dusting her skirt with his stuffed hands.
"Mister Yoop is a perfect stranger to me, but I fear, from the rude manner in which he has acted, that he is no gentleman."
Dorothy and Ojo laughed at this statement and Toto barked as if he understood the joke, after which they all felt better and resumed the journey in high spirits.
"Of course," said the little girl, when they had walked a way along the passage, "it was lucky for us the Giant was caged; for, if he had happened to be loose, he&#8212;he&#8212;"
"Perhaps, in that case, he wouldn't be hungry any more," said Ojo gravely.
They must have had good courage to climb all those rocks, for after getting out of the canyon they encountered more rock hills to be surmounted.
Toto could jump from one rock to another quite easily, but the others had to creep and climb with care, so that after a whole day of such work Dorothy and Ojo found themselves very tired.
As they gazed upward at the great mass of tumbled rocks that covered the steep incline, Dorothy gave a little groan and said:
"That's going to be a ter'ble hard climb, Scarecrow.
I wish we could find the dark well without so much trouble."
"Suppose," said Ojo, "you wait here and let me do the climbing, for it's on my account we're searching for the dark well.
Then, if I don't find anything, I'll come back and join you."
"No," replied the little girl, shaking her head positively, "we'll all go together, for that way we can help each other.
If you went alone, something might happen to you, Ojo."
So they began the climb and found it indeed difficult, for a way. But presently, in creeping over the big crags, they found a path at their feet which wound in and out among the masses of rock and was quite smooth and easy to walk upon.
As the path gradually ascended the mountain, although in a roundabout way, they decided to follow it.
"This must be the road to the Country of the Hoppers," said the Scarecrow.
"Who are the Hoppers?"
asked Dorothy.
"Some people Jack Pumpkinhead told me about," he replied.
"I didn't hear him," replied the girl.
"No; you were asleep," explained the Scarecrow.
"But he told Scraps and me that the Hoppers and the Horners live on this mountain."
"He said in the mountain," declared Scraps; "but of course he meant on it."
"Didn't he say what the Hoppers and Horners were like?"
inquired Dorothy.
"No; he only said they were two separate nations, and that the Horners were the most important."
"Well, if we go to their country we'll find out all about 'em," said the girl.
"But I've never heard Ozma mention those people, so they can't be very important."
"Is this mountain in the Land of Oz?"
asked Scraps.
"Course it is," answered Dorothy. "It's in the South Country of the Quadlings. When one comes to the edge of Oz, in any direction, there is nothing more to be seen at all.
Once you could see sandy desert all around Oz; but now it's diff'rent, and no other people can see us, any more than we can see them."
"If the mountain is under Ozma's rule, why doesn't she know about the Hoppers and the Horners?"
Ojo asked.
"Why, it's a fairyland," explained Dorothy, "and lots of queer people live in places so tucked away that those in the Emerald City never even hear of 'em.
In the middle of the country it's diff'rent, but when you get around the edges you're sure to run into strange little corners that surprise you.
I know, for I've traveled in Oz a good deal, and so has the Scarecrow."
"Yes," admitted the straw man, "I've been considerable of a traveler, in my time, and I like to explore strange places.
I find I learn much more by traveling than by staying at home."
During this conversation they had been walking up the steep pathway and now found themselves well up on the mountain. They could see nothing around them, for the rocks beside their path were higher than their heads.
Nor could they see far in front of them, because the path was so crooked.
But suddenly they stopped, because the path ended and there was no place to go.
Ahead was a big rock lying against the side of the mountain, and this blocked the way completely.
"There wouldn't be a path, though, if it didn't go somewhere," said the Scarecrow, wrinkling his forehead in deep thought.
"This is somewhere, isn't it?"
asked the Patchwork Girl, laughing at the bewildered looks of the others.
"The path is locked, the way is blocked, Yet here we've innocently flocked; And now we're here it's rather queer There's no front door that can be knocked."
"Please don't, Scraps," said Ojo.
"You make me nervous."
"Well," said Dorothy, "I'm glad of a little rest, for that's a drea'ful steep path."
As she spoke she leaned against the edge of the big rock that stood in their way.
To her surprise it slowly swung backward and showed behind it a dark hole that looked like the mouth of a tunnel.
"Why, here's where the path goes to!"
she exclaimed.
"So it is," answered the Scarecrow.
"But the question is, do we want to go where the path does?"
"It's underground; right inside the mountain," said Ojo, peering into the dark hole.
"Perhaps there's a well there; and, if there is, it's sure to be a dark one."
"Why, that's true enough!"
cried Dorothy with eagerness.
"Let's go in, Scarecrow; 'cause, if others have gone, we're pretty safe to go, too."
Toto looked in and barked, but he did not venture to enter until the Scarecrow had bravely gone first. Scraps followed closely after the straw man and then Ojo and Dorothy timidly stepped inside the tunnel.
As soon as all of them had passed the big rock, it slowly turned and filled up the opening again; but now they were no longer in the dark, for a soft, rosy light enabled them to see around them quite distinctly.
It was only a passage, wide enough for two of them to walk abreast - with Toto in between them - and it had a high, arched roof. They could not see where the light which flooded the place so pleasantly came from, for there were no lamps anywhere visible.
The passage ran straight for a little way and then made a bend to the right and another sharp turn to the left, after which it went straight again.
But there were no side passages, so they could not lose their way.
After proceeding some distance, Toto, who had gone on ahead, began to bark loudly. They ran around a bend to see what was the matter and found a man sitting on the floor of the passage and leaning his back against the wall.
He had probably been asleep before Toto's barks aroused him, for he was now rubbing his eyes and staring at the little dog with all his might.
There was something about this man that Toto objected to, and when he slowly rose to his foot they saw what it was.
He had but one leg, set just below the middle of his round, fat body; but it was a stout leg and had a broad, flat foot at the bottom of it, on which the man seemed to stand very well.
He had never had but this one leg, which looked something like a pedestal, and when Toto ran up and made a grab at the man's ankle he hopped first one way and then another in a very active manner, looking so frightened that Scraps laughed aloud.
Toto was usually a well behaved dog, but this time he was angry and snapped at the man's leg again and again. This filled the poor fellow with fear, and in hopping out of Toto's reach he suddenly lost his balance and tumbled heel over head upon the floor.
When he sat up he kicked Toto on the nose and made the dog howl angrily, but Dorothy now ran forward and caught Toto's collar, holding him back.
"Do you surrender?"
she asked the man.
"Who?
Me?"
asked the Hopper.
"Yes; you," said the little girl.
"Am I captured?"
he inquired.
"Of course.
My dog has captured you," she said.
"Well," replied the man, "if I'm captured I must surrender, for it's the proper thing to do.
I like to do everything proper, for it saves one a lot of trouble."
"It does, indeed," said Dorothy.
"Please tell us who you are."
"I'm Hip Hopper - Hip Hopper, the Champion."
"Champion what?"
she asked in surprise.
"Champion wrestler.
I'm a very strong man, and that ferocious animal which you are so kindly holding is the first living thing that has ever conquered me."
"And you are a Hopper?"
she continued.
"Yes.
My people live in a great city not far from here.
Would you like to visit it?"
"I'm not sure," she said with hesitation.
"Have you any dark wells in your city?"
"I think not. We have wells, you know, but they're all well lighted, and a well lighted well cannot well be a dark well.
But there may be such a thing as a very dark well in the Horner Country, which is a black spot on the face of the earth."
"Where is the Horner Country?"
Ojo inquired.
"The other side of the mountain.
There's a fence between the Hopper Country and the Horner Country, and a gate in the fence; but you can't pass through just now, because we are at war with the Horners."
"That's too bad," said the Scarecrow.
"What seems to be the trouble?"
"Why, one of them made a very insulting remark about my people. He said we were lacking in understanding, because we had only one leg to a person. I can't see that legs have anything to do with understanding things. The Horners each have two legs, just as you have.
That's one leg too many, it seems to me."
"No," declared Dorothy, "it's just the right number."
"You don't need them," argued the Hopper, obstinately.
"You've only one head, and one body, and one nose and mouth.
Two legs are quite unnecessary, and they spoil one's shape."
"But how can you walk, with only one leg?"
asked Ojo.
"Walk!
Who wants to walk?"
exclaimed the man.
"Walking is a terribly awkward way to travel.
I hop, and so do all my people.
It's so much more graceful and agreeable than walking."
"I don't agree with you," said the Scarecrow.
"But tell me, is there any way to get to the Horner Country without going through the city of the Hoppers?"
"Yes; there is another path from the rocky lowlands, outside the mountain, that leads straight to the entrance of the Horner Country. But it's a long way around, so you'd better come with me.
Perhaps they will allow you to go through the gate; but we expect to conquer them this afternoon, if we get time, and then you may go and come as you please."
They thought it best to take the Hopper's advice, and asked him to lead the way.
This he did in a series of hops, and he moved so swiftly in this strange manner that those with two legs had to run to keep up with him.
It was not long before they left the passage and came to a great cave, so high that it must have reached nearly to the top of the mountain within which it lay.
It was a magnificent cave, illumined by the soft, invisible light, so that everything in it could be plainly seen.
The walls were of polished marble, white with veins of delicate colors running through it, and the roof was arched and fantastic and beautiful.
Built beneath this vast dome was a pretty village - not very large, for there seemed not more than fifty houses altogether - and the dwellings were of marble and artistically designed.
No grass nor flowers nor trees grew in this cave, so the yards surrounding the houses carved in designs both were smooth and bare and had low walls around them to mark their boundaries.
In the streets and the yards of the houses were many people all having one leg growing below their bodies and all hopping here and there whenever they moved.
Even the children stood firmly upon their single legs and never lost their balance.
"All hail, Champion!"
cried a man in the first group of Hoppers they met; "whom have you captured?"
"No one," replied the Champion in a gloomy voice; "these strangers have captured me."
"Then," said another, "we will rescue you, and capture them, for we are greater in number."
"No," answered the Champion, "I can't allow it.
I've surrendered, and it isn't polite to capture those you've surrendered to."
"Never mind that," said Dorothy.
"We will give you your liberty and set you free."
"Really?"
asked the Champion in joyous tones.
"Yes," said the little girl; "your people may need you to help conquer the Horners."
At this all the Hoppers looked downcast and sad.
Several more had joined the group by this time and quite a crowd of curious men, women and children surrounded the strangers.
"This war with our neighbors is a terrible thing," remarked one of the women.
"Some one is almost sure to get hurt."
"Why do you say that, madam?"
inquired the Scarecrow.
"Because the horns of our enemies are sharp, and in battle they will try to stick those horns into our warriors," she replied.
"How many horns do the Horners have?"
asked Dorothy.
"Each has one horn in the center of his forehead," was the answer.
"Oh, then they're unicorns," declared the Scarecrow.
"No; they're Horners.
We never go to war with them if we can help it, on account of their dangerous horns; but this insult was so great and so unprovoked that our brave men decided to fight, in order to be revenged," said the woman.
"What weapons do you fight with?"
the Scarecrow asked.
"We have no weapons," explained the Champion.
"Whenever we fight the Horners, our plan is to push them back, for our arms are longer than theirs."
"Then you are better armed," said Scraps.
"Yes; but they have those terrible horns, and unless we are careful they prick us with the points," returned the Champion with a shudder.
"That makes a war with them dangerous, and a dangerous war cannot be a pleasant one."
"I see very clearly," remarked the Scarecrow, "that you are going to have trouble in conquering those Horners - unless we help you."
"Oh!"
cried the Hoppers in a chorus; "can you help us?
Please do!
We will be greatly obliged!
It would please us very much!"
and by these exclamations the Scarecrow knew that his speech had met with favor.
"How far is it to the Horner Country?"
he asked.
"Why, it's just the other side of the fence," they answered, and the Champion added:
"Come with me, please, and I'll show you the Horners."
So they followed the Champion and several others through the streets and just beyond the village came to a very high picket fence, built all of marble, which seemed to divide the great cave into two equal parts.
But the part inhabited by the Horners was in no way as grand in appearance as that of the Hoppers. Instead of being marble, the walls and roof were of dull gray rock and the square houses were plainly made of the same material.
But in extent the city was much larger than that of the Hoppers and the streets were thronged with numerous people who busied themselves in various ways.
Looking through the open pickets of the fence our friends watched the Horners, who did not know they were being watched by strangers, and found them very unusual in appearance. They were little folks in size and had bodies round as balls and short legs and arms.
Their heads were round, too, and they had long, pointed ears and a horn set in the center of the forehead.
The horns did not seem very terrible, for they were not more than six inches long; but they were ivory white and sharp pointed, and no wonder the Hoppers feared them.
The skins of the Horners were light brown, but they wore snow-white robes and were bare-footed. Dorothy thought the most striking thing about them was their hair, which grew in three distinct colors on each and every head&#8212;red, yellow and green.
The red was at the bottom and sometimes hung over their eyes; then came a broad circle of yellow and the green was at the top and formed a brush-shaped top-knot.
None of the Horners was yet aware of the presence of strangers, who watched the little brown people for a time and then went to the big gate in the center of the dividing fence.
It was locked on both sides and over the latch was a sign reading:
"Can't we go through?"
asked Dorothy.
"Not now," answered the Champion.
"I think," said the Scarecrow, "that if I could talk with those Horners they would apologize to you, and then there would be no need to fight."
"Can't you talk from this side?"
asked the Champion.
"Not so well," replied the Scarecrow.
"Do you suppose you could throw me over that fence?
It is high, but I am very light."
"We can try it," said the Hopper.
"I am perhaps the strongest man in my country, so I'll undertake to do the throwing.
But I won't promise you will land on your feet."
"No matter about that," returned the Scarecrow.
"Just toss me over and I'll be satisfied."
So the Champion picked up the Scarecrow and balanced him a moment, to see how much he weighed, and then with all his strength tossed him high into the air.
Perhaps if the Scarecrow had been a trifle heavier he would have been easier to throw and would have gone a greater distance; but, as it was, instead of going over the fence he landed just on top of it, and one of the sharp pickets caught him in the middle of his back and held him fast prisoner.
Had he been face downward the Scarecrow might have managed to free himself, but lying on his back on the picket his hands waved in the air of the Horner Country while his feet kicked the air of the Hopper Country; so there he was.
"Are you hurt?"
called the Patchwork Girl anxiously.
"Course not," said Dorothy.
"But if he wiggles that way he may tear his clothes.
How can we get him down, Mr.
Champion?"
The Champion shook his head.
"I don't know," he confessed.
"If he could scare Horners as well as he does crows, it might be a good idea to leave him there."
"This is terrible," said Ojo, almost ready to cry.
"I s'pose it's because I am Ojo the Unlucky that everyone who tries to help me gets into trouble."
"You are lucky to have anyone to help you," declared Dorothy.
"But don't worry.
We'll rescue the Scarecrow somehow."
"I know how," announced Scraps.
"Here, Mr. Champion; just throw me up to the Scarecrow.
I'm nearly as light as he is, and when I'm on top the fence I'll pull our friend off the picket and toss him down to you."
"All right," said the Champion, and he picked up the Patchwork Girl and threw her in the same manner he had the Scarecrow.
He must have used more strength this time, however, for Scraps sailed far over the top of the fence and, without being able to grab the Scarecrow at all, tumbled to the ground in the Horner Country, where her stuffed body knocked over two men and a woman and made a crowd that had collected there run like rabbits to get away from her.
Seeing the next moment that she was harmless, the people slowly returned and gathered around the Patchwork Girl, regarding her with astonishment. One of them wore a jeweled star in his hair, just above his horn, and this seemed a person of importance.
He spoke for the rest of his people, who treated him with great respect.
"Who are you, Unknown Being?"
he asked.
"Scraps," she said, rising to her feet and patting her cotton wadding smooth where it had bunched up.
"And where did you come from?"
he continued.
"Over the fence.
Don't be silly.
There's no other place I could have come from," she replied.
He looked at her thoughtfully.
"You are not a Hopper," said he, "for you have two legs.
They're not very well shaped, but they are two in number.
And that strange creature on top the fence&#8212;why doesn't he stop kicking?&#8212;must be your brother, or father, or son, for he also has two legs."
"You must have been to visit the Wise Donkey," said Scraps, laughing so merrily that the crowd smiled with her, in sympathy.
"But that reminds me, Captain - or King - "
"I am Chief of the Horners, and my name is Jak."
"Of course; Little Jack Horner; I might have known it.
But the reason I volplaned over the fence was so I could have a talk with you about the Hoppers."
"What about the Hoppers?"
asked the Chief, frowning.
"You've insulted them, and you'd better beg their pardon," said Scraps.
"If you don't, they'll probably hop over here and conquer you."
"We're not afraid - as long as the gate is locked," declared the Chief.
"And we didn't insult them at all.
One of us made a joke that the stupid Hoppers couldn't see."
The Chief smiled as he said this and the smile made his face look quite jolly.
"What was the joke?"
asked Scraps.
"A Horner said they have less understanding than we, because they've only one leg. Ha, ha! You see the point, don't you? If you stand on your legs, and your legs are under you, then - ha, ha, ha! - then your legs are your under-standing. Hee, hee, hee! Ho, ho!
My, but that's a fine joke.
And the stupid Hoppers couldn't see it!
They couldn't see that with only one leg they must have less under-standing than we who have two legs.
Ha, ha, ha!
Hee, hee!
Ho, ho!"
The Chief wiped the tears of laughter from his eyes with the bottom hem of his white robe, and all the other Horners wiped their eyes on their robes, for they had laughed just as heartily as their Chief at the absurd joke.
"Then," said Scraps, "their understanding of the understanding you meant led to the misunderstanding."
"Exactly; and so there's no need for us to apologize," returned the Chief.
"No need for an apology, perhaps, but much need for an explanation," said Scraps decidedly.
"You don't want war, do you?"
"Not if we can help it," admitted Jak Horner.
"The question is, who's going to explain the joke to the Horners?
You know it spoils any joke to be obliged to explain it, and this is the best joke I ever heard."
"Who made the joke?"
asked Scraps.
"Diksey Horner.
He is working in the mines, just now, but he'll be home before long.
Suppose we wait and talk with him about it?
Maybe he'll be willing to explain his joke to the Hoppers."
"All right," said Scraps.
"I'll wait, if Diksey isn't too long."
"No, he's short; he's shorter than I am.
Ha, ha, ha!
Say!
that's a better joke than Diksey's.
He won't be too long, because he's short.
Hee, hee, ho!"
The other Horners who were standing by roared with laughter and seemed to like their Chief's joke as much as he did.
Scraps thought it was odd that they could be so easily amused, but decided there could be little harm in people who laughed so merrily.
"Come with me to my dwelling and I'll introduce you to my daughters," said the Chief.
"We're bringing them up according to a book of rules that was written by one of our leading old bachelors, and everyone says they're a remarkable lot of girls."
So Scraps accompanied him along the street to a house that seemed on the outside exceptionally grimy and dingy.
The streets of this city were not paved nor had any attempt been made to beautify the houses or their surroundings, and having noticed this condition Scraps was astonished when the Chief ushered her into his home.
Here was nothing grimy or faded, indeed. On the contrary, the room was of dazzling brilliance and beauty, for it was lined throughout with an exquisite metal that resembled translucent frosted silver.
The surface of this metal was highly ornamented in raised designs representing men, animals, flowers and trees, and from the metal itself was radiated the soft light which flooded the room.
All the furniture was made of the same glorious metal, and Scraps asked what it was.
"That's radium," answered the Chief.
"We Horners spend all our time digging radium from the mines under this mountain, and we use it to decorate our homes and make them pretty and cosy.
It is a medicine, too, and no one can ever be sick who lives near radium."
"Have you plenty of it?"
asked the Patchwork Girl.
"More than we can use.
All the houses in this city are decorated with it, just the same as mine is."
"Why don't you use it on your streets, then, and the outside of your houses, to make them as pretty as they are within?"
she inquired.
"Outside? Who cares for the outside of anything?" asked the Chief. "We Horners don't live on the outside of our homes; we live inside. Many people are like those stupid Hoppers, who love to make an outside show.
I suppose you strangers thought their city more beautiful than ours, because you judged from appearances and they have handsome marble houses and marble streets; but if you entered one of their stiff dwellings you would find it bare and uncomfortable, as all their show is on the outside.
They have an idea that what is not seen by others is not important, but with us the rooms we live in are our chief delight and care, and we pay no attention to outside show."
"Seems to me," said Scraps, musingly, "it would be better to make it all pretty - inside and out."
"Seems?
Why, you're all seams, my girl!"
said the Chief; and then he laughed heartily at his latest joke and a chorus of small voices echoed the chorus with "tee-hee-hee!
ha, ha!"
Scraps turned around and found a row of girls seated in radium chairs ranged along one wall of the room. There were nineteen of them, by actual count, and they were of all sizes from a tiny child to one almost a grown woman.
All were neatly dressed in spotless white robes and had brown skins, horns on their foreheads and three-colored hair.
"These," said the Chief, "are my sweet daughters.
My dears, I introduce to you Miss Scraps Patchwork, a lady who is traveling in foreign parts to increase her store of wisdom."
The nineteen Horner girls all arose and made a polite curtsey, after which they resumed their seats and rearranged their robes properly.
"Why do they sit so still, and all in a row?"
asked Scraps.
"Because it is ladylike and proper," replied the Chief.
"But some are just children, poor things!
Don't they ever run around and play and laugh, and have a good time?"
"No, indeed," said the Chief. "That would be improper in young ladies, as well as in those who will sometime become young ladies.
My daughters are being brought up according to the rules and regulations laid down by a leading bachelor who has given the subject much study and is himself a man of taste and culture.
Politeness is his great hobby, and he claims that if a child is allowed to do an impolite thing one cannot expect the grown person to do anything better."
"Is it impolite to romp and shout and be jolly?"
asked Scraps.
"Well, sometimes it is, and sometimes it isn't," replied the Horner, after considering the question. "By curbing such inclinations in my daughters we keep on the safe side.
Once in a while I make a good joke, as you have heard, and then I permit my daughters to laugh decorously; but they are never allowed to make a joke themselves."
"That old bachelor who made the rules ought to be skinned alive!"
declared Scraps, and would have said more on the subject had not the door opened to admit a little Horner man whom the Chief introduced as Diksey.
"What's up, Chief?"
asked Diksey, winking nineteen times at the nineteen girls, who demurely cast down their eyes because their father was looking.
The Chief told the man that his joke had not been understood by the dull Hoppers, who had become so angry that they had declared war.
So the only way to avoid a terrible battle was to explain the joke so they could understand it.
"All right," replied Diksey, who seemed a good-natured man; "I'll go at once to the fence and explain.
I don't want any war with the Hoppers, for wars between nations always cause hard feelings."
So the Chief and Diksey and Scraps left the house and went back to the marble picket fence. The Scarecrow was still stuck on the top of his picket but had now ceased to struggle.
On the other side of the fence were Dorothy and Ojo, looking between the pickets; and there, also, were the Champion and many other Hoppers.
Diksey went close to the fence and said:
"My good Hoppers, I wish to explain that what I said about you was a joke. You have but one leg each, and we have two legs each. Our legs are under us, whether one or two, and we stand on them.
So, when I said you had less understanding than we, I did not mean that you had less understanding, you understand, but that you had less standundering, so to speak.
Do you understand that?"
The Hoppers thought it over carefully.
Then one said:
"That is clear enough; but where does the joke come in?'"
Dorothy laughed, for she couldn't help it, although all the others were solemn enough.
"I'll tell you where the joke comes in," she said, and took the Hoppers away to a distance, where the Horners could not hear them.
"You know," she then explained, "those neighbors of yours are not very bright, poor things, and what they think is a joke isn't a joke at all - it's true, don't you see?"
"True that we have less understanding?"
asked the Champion.
"Yes; it's true because you don't understand such a poor joke; if you did, you'd be no wiser than they are."
"Ah, yes; of course," they answered, looking very wise.
"So I'll tell you what to do," continued Dorothy.
"Laugh at their poor joke and tell 'em it's pretty good for a Horner.
Then they won't dare say you have less understanding, because you understand as much as they do."
The Hoppers looked at one another questioningly and blinked their eyes and tried to think what it all meant; but they couldn't figure it out.
"What do you think, Champion?"
asked one of them.
"I think it is dangerous to think of this thing any more than we can help," he replied. "Let us do as this girl says and laugh with the Horners, so as to make them believe we see the joke.
Then there will be peace again and no need to fight."
They readily agreed to this and returned to the fence laughing as loud and as hard as they could, although they didn't feel like laughing a bit.
The Horners were much surprised.
"That's a fine joke - for a Horner - and we are much pleased with it," said the Champion, speaking between the pickets.
"But please don't do it again."
"I won't," promised Diksey.
"If I think of another such joke I'll try to forget it."
"Good!"
cried the Chief Horner.
"The war is over and peace is declared."
There was much joyful shouting on both sides of the fence and the gate was unlocked and thrown wide open, so that Scraps was able to rejoin her friends.
"What about the Scarecrow?"
she asked Dorothy.
"We must get him down, somehow or other," was the reply.
"Perhaps the Horners can find a way," suggested Ojo.
So they all went through the gate and Dorothy asked the Chief Horner how they could get the Scarecrow off the fence.
The Chief didn't know how, but Diksey said:
"A ladder's the thing."
"Have you one?"
asked Dorothy.
"To be sure.
We use ladders in our mines," said he.
Then he ran away to get the ladder, and while he was gone the Horners gathered around and welcomed the strangers to their country, for through them a great war had been avoided.
In a little while Diksey came back with a tall ladder which he placed against the fence. Ojo at once climbed to the top of the ladder and Dorothy went about halfway up and Scraps stood at the foot of it. Toto ran around it and barked.
Then Ojo pulled the Scarecrow away from the picket and passed him down to Dorothy, who in turn lowered him to the Patchwork Girl.
As soon as he was on his feet and standing on solid ground the Scarecrow said:
"Much obliged.
I feel much better.
I'm not stuck on that picket any more."
The Horners began to laugh, thinking this was a joke, but the Scarecrow shook himself and patted his straw a little and said to Dorothy: "Is there much of a hole in my back?"
The little girl examined him carefully.
"There's quite a hole," she said.
"But I've got a needle and thread in the knapsack and I'll sew you up again."
"Do so," he begged earnestly, and again the Hoppers laughed, to the Scarecrow's great annoyance.
While Dorothy was sewing up the hole in the straw man's back Scraps examined the other parts of him.
"One of his legs is ripped, too!"
she exclaimed.
"Oho!"
cried little Diksey; "that's bad.
Give him the needle and thread and let him mend his ways."
"Ha, ha, ha!"
laughed the Chief, and the other Horners at once roared with laughter.
"What's funny?"
inquired the Scarecrow sternly.
"Don't you see?" asked Diksey, who had laughed even harder than the others. "That's a joke. It's by odds the best joke I ever made. You walk with your legs, and so that's the way you walk, and your legs are the ways. See?
So, when you mend your legs, you mend your ways.
Ho, ho, ho!
hee, hee!
I'd no idea I could make such a fine joke!"
"Just wonderful!"
echoed the Chief.
"How do you manage to do it, Diksey?"
"I don't know," said Diksey modestly.
"Perhaps it's the radium, but I rather think it's my splendid intellect."
"If you don't quit it," the Scarecrow told him, "there'll be a worse war than the one you've escaped from."
Ojo had been deep in thought, and now he asked the Chief: "Is there a dark well in any part of your country?"
"A dark well?
None that ever I heard of," was the answer.
"Oh, yes," said Diksey, who overheard the boy's question.
"There's a very dark well down in my radium mine."
"Is there any water in it?"
Ojo eagerly asked.
"Can't say; I've never looked to see.
But we can find out."
So, as soon as the Scarecrow was mended, they decided to go with Diksey to the mine.
When Dorothy had patted the straw man into shape again he declared he felt as good as new and equal to further adventures.
"Still," said he, "I prefer not to do picket duty again.
High life doesn't seem to agree with my constitution."
And then they hurried away to escape the laughter of the Horners, who thought this was another joke.
They now followed Diksey to the farther end of the great cave, beyond the Horner city, where there were several round, dark holes leading into the ground in a slanting direction.
Diksey went to one of these holes and said:
"Here is the mine in which lies the dark well you are seeking.
Follow me and step carefully and I'll lead you to the place."
He went in first and after him came Ojo, and then Dorothy, with the Scarecrow behind her.
The Patchwork Girl entered last of all, for Toto kept close beside his little mistress.
A few steps beyond the mouth of the opening it was pitch dark. "You won't lose your way, though," said the Horner, "for there's only one way to go. The mine's mine and I know every step of the way. How's that for a joke, eh? The mine's mine."
Then he chuckled gleefully as they followed him silently down the steep slant.
The hole was just big enough to permit them to walk upright, although the Scarecrow, being much the taller of the party, often had to bend his head to keep from hitting the top.
The floor of the tunnel was difficult to walk upon because it had been worn smooth as glass, and pretty soon Scraps, who was some distance behind the others, slipped and fell head foremost.
At once she began to slide downward, so swiftly that when she came to the Scarecrow she knocked him off his feet and sent him tumbling against Dorothy, who tripped up Ojo.
The boy fell against the Horner, so that all went tumbling down the slide in a regular mix-up, unable to see where they were going because of the darkness.
Fortunately, when they reached the bottom the Scarecrow and Scraps were in front, and the others bumped against them, so that no one was hurt.
They found themselves in a vast cave which was dimly lighted by the tiny grains of radium that lay scattered among the loose rocks.
"Now," said Diksey, when they had all regained their feet, "I will show you where the dark well is.
This is a big place, but if we hold fast to each other we won't get lost."
They took hold of hands and the Horner led them into a dark corner, where he halted.
"Be careful," said he warningly.
"The well is at your feet."
"All right," replied Ojo, and kneeling down he felt in the well with his hand and found that it contained a quantity of water.
"Where's the gold flask, Dorothy?"
he asked, and the little girl handed him the flask, which she had brought with her.
Ojo knelt again and by feeling carefully in the dark managed to fill the flask with the unseen water that was in the well.
Then he screwed the top of the flask firmly in place and put the precious water in his pocket.
"All right!"
he said again, in a glad voice; "now we can go back."
They returned to the mouth of the tunnel and began to creep cautiously up the incline.
This time they made Scraps stay behind, for fear she would slip again; but they all managed to get up in safety and the Munchkin boy was very happy when he stood in the Horner city and realized that the water from the dark well, which he and his friends had traveled so far to secure, was safe in his jacket pocket.
"Now," said Dorothy, as they stood on the mountain path, having left behind them the cave in which dwelt the Hoppers and the Horners, "I think we must find a road into the Country of the Winkies, for there is where Ojo wants to go next."
"Is there such a road?"
asked the Scarecrow.
"I don't know," she replied.
"I s'pose we can go back the way we came, to Jack Pumpkinhead's house, and then turn into the Winkie Country; but that seems like running 'round a haystack, doesn't it?"
"Yes," said the Scarecrow.
"What is the next thing Ojo must get?"
"A yellow butterfly," answered the boy.
"That means the Winkie Country, all right, for it's the yellow country of Oz," remarked Dorothy.
"I think, Scarecrow, we ought to take him to the Tin Woodman, for he's the Emp'ror of the Winkies and will help us to find what Ojo wants."
"Of course," replied the Scarecrow, brightening at the suggestion. "The Tin Woodman will do anything we ask him, for he's one of my dearest friends.
I believe we can take a crosscut into his country and so get to his castle a day sooner than if we travel back the way we came."
"I think so, too," said the girl; "and that means we must keep to the left."
They were obliged to go down the mountain before they found any path that led in the direction they wanted to go, but among the tumbled rocks at the foot of the mountain was a faint trail which they decided to follow.
Two or three hours walk along this trail brought them to a clear, level country, where there were a few farms and some scattered houses.
But they knew they were still in the Country of the Quadlings, because everything had a bright red color.
Not that the trees and grasses were red, but the fences and houses were painted that color and all the wild-flowers that bloomed by the wayside had red blossoms.
This part of the Quadling Country seemed peaceful and prosperous, if rather lonely, and the road was more distinct and easier to follow.
But just as they were congratulating themselves upon the progress they had made they came upon a broad river which swept along between high banks, and here the road ended and there was no bridge of any sort to allow them to cross.
"This is queer," mused Dorothy, looking at the water reflectively.
"Why should there be any road, if the river stops everyone walking along it?"
"Wow!"
said Toto, gazing earnestly into her face.
"That's the best answer you'll get," declared the Scarecrow, with his comical smile, "for no one knows any more than Toto about this road."
Said Scraps:
"Ev'ry time I see a river, I have chills that make me shiver, For I never can forget All the water's very wet.
If my patches get a soak It will be a sorry joke; So to swim I'll never try Till I find the water dry."
"Try to control yourself, Scraps," said Ojo; "you're getting crazy again.
No one intends to swim that river."
"No," decided Dorothy, "we couldn't swim it if we tried.
It's too big a river, and the water moves awful fast."
"There ought to be a ferryman with a boat," said the Scarecrow; "but I don't see any."
"Couldn't we make a raft?"
suggested Ojo.
"There's nothing to make one of," answered Dorothy.
"Wow!"
said Toto again, and Dorothy saw he was looking along the bank of the river.
"Why, he sees a house over there!"
cried the little girl.
"I wonder we didn't notice it ourselves.
Let's go and ask the people how to get 'cross the river."
A quarter of a mile along the bank stood a small, round house, painted bright red, and as it was on their side of the river they hurried toward it.
A chubby little man, dressed all in red, came out to greet them, and with him were two children, also in red costumes.
The man's eyes were big and staring as he examined the Scarecrow and the Patchwork Girl, and the children shyly hid behind him and peeked timidly at Toto.
"Do you live here, my good man?"
asked the Scarecrow.
"I think I do, Most Mighty Magician," replied the Quadling, bowing low; "but whether I'm awake or dreaming I can't be positive, so I'm not sure where I live.
If you'll kindly pinch me I'll find out all about it!"
"You're awake," said Dorothy, "and this is no magician, but just the Scarecrow."
"But he's alive," protested the man, "and he oughtn't to be, you know.
And that other dreadful person - the girl who is all patches - seems to be alive, too."
"Very much so," declared Scraps, making a face at him.
"But that isn't your affair, you know."
"I've a right to be surprised, haven't I?"
asked the man meekly.
"I'm not sure; but anyhow you've no right to say I'm dreadful.
The Scarecrow, who is a gentleman of great wisdom, thinks I'm beautiful," retorted Scraps.
"Never mind all that," said Dorothy.
"Tell us, good Quadling, how we can get across the river."
"I don't know," replied the Quadling.
"Don't you ever cross it?"
asked the girl.
"Never."
"Don't travelers cross it?"
"Not to my knowledge," said he.
They were much surprised to hear this, and the man added: "It's a pretty big river, and the current is strong.
I know a man who lives on the opposite bank, for I've seen him there a good many years; but we've never spoken because neither of us has ever crossed over."
"That's queer," said the Scarecrow.
"Don't you own a boat?"
The man shook his head.
"Nor a raft?"
"Where does this river go to?"
asked Dorothy.
"That way," answered the man, pointing with one hand, "it goes into the Country of the Winkies, which is ruled by the Tin Emperor, who must be a mighty magician because he's all made of tin, and yet he's alive.
And that way," pointing with the other hand, "the river runs between two mountains where dangerous people dwell."
The Scarecrow looked at the water before them.
"The current flows toward the Winkie Country," said he; "and so, if we had a boat, or a raft, the river would float us there more quickly and more easily than we could walk."
"That is true," agreed Dorothy; and then they all looked thoughtful and wondered what could be done.
"Why can't the man make us a raft?"
asked Ojo.
"Will you?"
inquired Dorothy, turning to the Quadling.
The chubby man shook his head.
"I'm too lazy," he said.
"My wife says I'm the laziest man in all Oz, and she is a truthful woman.
I hate work of any kind, and making a raft is hard work."
"I'll give you my em'rald ring," promised the girl.
"No; I don't care for emeralds.
If it were a ruby, which is the color I like best, I might work a little while."
"I've got some Square Meal Tablets," said the Scarecrow.
"Each one is the same as a dish of soup, a fried fish, a mutton pot-pie, lobster salad, charlotte russe and lemon jelly - all made into one little tablet that you can swallow without trouble."
"Without trouble!"
exclaimed the Quadling, much interested; "then those tablets would be fine for a lazy man.
It's such hard work to chew when you eat."
"I'll give you six of those tablets if you'll help us make a raft," promised the Scarecrow. "They're a combination of food which people who eat are very fond of. I never eat, you know, being straw; but some of my friends eat regularly.
What do you say to my offer, Quadling?"
"I'll do it," decided the man.
"I'll help, and you can do most of the work.
But my wife has gone fishing for red eels to-day, so some of you will have to mind the children."
Scraps promised to do that, and the children were not so shy when the Patchwork Girl sat down to play with them.
They grew to like Toto, too, and the little dog allowed them to pat him on his head, which gave the little ones much joy.
There were a number of fallen trees near the house and the Quadling got his axe and chopped them into logs of equal length.
He took his wife's clothesline to bind these logs together, so that they would form a raft, and Ojo found some strips of wood and nailed them along the tops of the logs, to render them more firm.
The Scarecrow and Dorothy helped roll the logs together and carry the strips of wood, but it took so long to make the raft that evening came just as it was finished, and with evening the Quadling's wife returned from her fishing.
The woman proved to be cross and bad-tempered, perhaps because she had only caught one red eel during all the day.
When she found that her husband had used her clothesline, and the logs she had wanted for firewood, and the boards she had intended to mend the shed with, and a lot of gold nails, she became very angry.
Scraps wanted to shake the woman, to make her behave, but Dorothy talked to her in a gentle tone and told the Quadling's wife she was a Princess of Oz and a friend of Ozma and that when she got back to the Emerald City she would send them a lot of things to repay them for the raft, including a new clothesline.
This promise pleased the woman and she soon became more pleasant, saying they could stay the night at her house and begin their voyage on the river next morning.
This they did, spending a pleasant evening with the Quadling family and being entertained with such hospitality as the poor people were able to offer them.
The man groaned a good deal and said he had overworked himself by chopping the logs, but the Scarecrow gave him two more tablets than he had promised, which seemed to comfort the lazy fellow.
Next morning they pushed the raft into the water and all got aboard. The Quadling man had to hold the log craft fast while they took their places, and the flow of the river was so powerful that it nearly tore the raft from his hands.
As soon as they were all seated upon the logs he let go and away it floated and the adventurers had begun their voyage toward the Winkie Country.
The little house of the Quadlings was out of sight almost before they had cried their good-byes, and the Scarecrow said in a pleased voice: "It won't take us long to get to the Winkie Country, at this rate."
They had floated several miles down the stream and were enjoying the ride when suddenly the raft slowed up, stopped short, and then began to float back the way it had come.
"Why, what's wrong?" asked Dorothy, in astonishment; but they were all just as bewildered as she was and at first no one could answer the question.
Soon, however, they realized the truth: that the current of the river had reversed and the water was now flowing in the opposite direction - toward the mountains.
They began to recognize the scenes they had passed, and by and by they came in sight of the little house of the Quadlings again.
The man was standing on the river bank and he called to them:
"How do you do?
Glad to see you again.
I forgot to tell you that the river changes its direction every little while.
Sometimes it flows one way, and sometimes the other."
They had no time to answer him, for the raft was swept past the house and a long distance on the other side of it.
"We're going just the way we don't want to go," said Dorothy, "and I guess the best thing we can do is to get to land before we're carried any farther."
But they could not get to land.
They had no oars, nor even a pole to guide the raft with.
The logs which bore them floated in the middle of the stream and were held fast in that position by the strong current.
So they sat still and waited and, even while they were wondering what could be done, the raft slowed down, stopped, and began drifting the other way - in the direction it had first followed. After a time they repassed the Quadling house and the man was still standing on the bank.
He cried out to them:
"Good day!
Glad to see you again.
I expect I shall see you a good many times, as you go by, unless you happen to swim ashore."
By that time they had left him behind and were headed once more straight toward the Winkie Country.
"This is pretty hard luck," said Ojo in a discouraged voice.
"The Trick River keeps changing, it seems, and here we must float back and forward forever, unless we manage in some way to get ashore."
"Can you swim?"
asked Dorothy.
"No; I'm Ojo the Unlucky."
"Neither can I. Toto can swim a little, but that won't help us to get to shore."
"I don't know whether I could swim, or not," remarked Scraps; "but if I tried it I'd surely ruin my lovely patches."
"My straw would get soggy in the water and I would sink," said the Scarecrow.
So there seemed no way out of their dilemma and being helpless they simply sat still. Ojo, who was on the front of the raft, looked over into the water and thought he saw some large fishes swimming about.
He found a loose end of the clothesline which fastened the logs together, and taking a gold nail from his pocket he bent it nearly double, to form a hook, and tied it to the end of the line.
Having baited the hook with some bread which he broke from his loaf, he dropped the line into the water and almost instantly it was seized by a great fish.
They knew it was a great fish, because it pulled so hard on the line that it dragged the raft forward even faster than the current of the river had carried it. The fish was frightened, and it was a strong swimmer.
As the other end of the clothesline was bound around the logs he could not get it away, and as he had greedily swallowed the gold hook at the first bite he could not get rid of that, either.
When they reached the place where the current had before changed, the fish was still swimming ahead in its wild attempt to escape. The raft slowed down, yet it did not stop, because the fish would not let it.
It continued to move in the same direction it had been going.
As the current reversed and rushed backward on its course it failed to drag the raft with it.
Slowly, inch by inch, they floated on, and the fish tugged and tugged and kept them going.
"I hope he won't give up," said Ojo anxiously.
"If the fish can hold out until the current changes again, we'll be all right."
The fish did not give up, but held the raft bravely on its course, till at last the water in the river shifted again and floated them the way they wanted to go. But now the captive fish found its strength failing.
Seeking a refuge, it began to drag the raft toward the shore.
As they did not wish to land in this place the boy cut the rope with his pocket-knife and set the fish free, just in time to prevent the raft from grounding.
The next time the river backed up the Scarecrow managed to seize the branch of a tree that overhung the water and they all assisted him to hold fast and prevent the raft from being carried backward.
While they waited here, Ojo spied a long broken branch lying upon the bank, so he leaped ashore and got it.
When he had stripped off the side shoots he believed he could use the branch as a pole, to guide the raft in case of emergency.
They clung to the tree until they found the water flowing the right way, when they let go and permitted the raft to resume its voyage.
In spite of these pauses they were really making good progress toward the Winkie Country and having found a way to conquer the adverse current their spirits rose considerably.
They could see little of the country through which they were passing, because of the high banks, and they met with no boats or other craft upon the surface of the river.
Once more the trick river reversed its current, but this time the Scarecrow was on guard and used the pole to push the raft toward a big rock which lay in the water. He believed the rock would prevent their floating backward with the current, and so it did.
They clung to this anchorage until the water resumed its proper direction, when they allowed the raft to drift on.
Floating around a bend they saw ahead a high bank of water, extending across the entire river, and toward this they were being irresistibly carried. There being no way to arrest the progress of the raft they clung fast to the logs and let the river sweep them on.
Swiftly the raft climbed the bank of water and slid down on the other side, plunging its edge deep into the water and drenching them all with spray.
As again the raft righted and drifted on, Dorothy and Ojo laughed at the ducking they had received; but Scraps was much dismayed and the Scarecrow took out his handkerchief and wiped the water off the Patchwork Girl's patches as well as he was able to.
The sun soon dried her and the colors of her patches proved good, for they did not run together nor did they fade.
After passing the wall of water the current did not change or flow backward any more but continued to sweep them steadily forward.
The banks of the river grew lower, too, permitting them to see more of the country, and presently they discovered yellow buttercups and dandelions growing amongst the grass, from which evidence they knew they had reached the Winkie Country.
"Don't you think we ought to land?"
Dorothy asked the Scarecrow.
"Pretty soon," he replied.
"The Tin Woodman's castle is in the southern part of the Winkie Country, and so it can't be a great way from here."
Fearing they might drift too far, Dorothy and Ojo now stood up and raised the Scarecrow in their arms, as high as they could, thus allowing him a good view of the country.
For a time he saw nothing he recognized, but finally he cried:
"There it is!
There it is!"
"What?"
asked Dorothy.
"The Tin Woodman's tin castle.
I can see its turrets glittering in the sun.
It's quite a way off, but we'd better land as quickly as we can."
They let him down and began to urge the raft toward the shore by means of the pole.
It obeyed very well, for the current was more sluggish now, and soon they had reached the bank and landed safely.
The Winkie Country was really beautiful, and across the fields they could see afar the silvery sheen of the tin castle.
With light hearts they hurried toward it, being fully rested by their long ride on the river.
By and by they began to cross an immense field of splendid yellow lilies, the delicate fragrance of which was very delightful.
"How beautiful they are!"
cried Dorothy, stopping to admire the perfection of these exquisite flowers.
"Yes," said the Scarecrow, reflectively, "but we must be careful not to crush or injure any of these lilies."
"Why not?"
asked Ojo.
"The Tin Woodman is very kind-hearted," was the reply, "and he hates to see any living thing hurt in any way."
"Are flowers alive?"
asked Scraps.
"Yes, of course.
And these flowers belong to the Tin Woodman.
So, in order not to offend him, we must not tread on a single blossom."
"Once," said Dorothy, "the Tin Woodman stepped on a beetle and killed the little creature.
That made him very unhappy and he cried until his tears rusted his joints, so he couldn't move 'em."
"What did he do then?"
asked Ojo.
"Put oil on them, until the joints worked smooth again."
"Oh!"
exclaimed the boy, as if a great discovery had flashed across his mind.
But he did not tell anybody what the discovery was and kept the idea to himself.
It was a long walk, but a pleasant one, and they did not mind it a bit.
Late in the afternoon they drew near to the wonderful tin castle of the Emperor of the Winkies, and Ojo and Scraps, who had never seen it before, were filled with amazement.
Tin abounded in the Winkie Country and the Winkies were said to be the most skillful tinsmiths in all the world.
So the Tin Woodman had employed them in building his magnificent castle, which was all of tin, from the ground to the tallest turret, and so brightly polished that it glittered in the sun's rays more gorgeously than silver.
Around the grounds of the castle ran a tin wall, with tin gates; but the gates stood wide open because the Emperor had no enemies to disturb him.
When they entered the spacious grounds our travelers found more to admire. Tin fountains sent sprays of clear water far into the air and there were many beds of tin flowers, all as perfectly formed as any natural flowers might be.
There were tin trees, too, and here and there shady bowers of tin, with tin benches and chairs to sit upon.
Also, on the sides of the pathway leading up to the front door of the castle, were rows of tin statuary, very cleverly executed.
Among these Ojo recognized statues of Dorothy, Toto, the Scarecrow, the Wizard, the Shaggy Man, Jack Pumpkinhead and Ozma, all standing upon neat pedestals of tin.
Toto was well acquainted with the residence of the Tin Woodman and, being assured a joyful welcome, he ran ahead and barked so loudly at the front door that the Tin Woodman heard him and came out in person to see if it were really his old friend Toto.
Next moment the tin man had clasped the Scarecrow in a warm embrace and then turned to hug Dorothy.
But now his eye was arrested by the strange sight of the Patchwork Girl, and he gazed upon her in mingled wonder and admiration.
The Tin Woodman was one of the most important personages in all Oz. Though Emperor of the Winkies, he owed allegiance to Ozma, who ruled all the land, and the girl and the tin man were warm personal friends.
He was something of a dandy and kept his tin body brilliantly polished and his tin joints well oiled.
Also he was very courteous in manner and so kind and gentle that everyone loved him.
The Emperor greeted Ojo and Scraps with cordial hospitality and ushered the entire party into his handsome tin parlor, where all the furniture and pictures were made of tin.
The walls were paneled with tin and from the tin ceiling hung tin chandeliers.
The Tin Woodman wanted to know, first of all, where Dorothy had found the Patchwork Girl, so between them the visitors told the story of how Scraps was made, as well as the accident to Margolotte and Unc Nunkie and how Ojo had set out upon a journey to procure the things needed for the Crooked Magician's magic charm.
Then Dorothy told of their adventures in the Quadling Country and how at last they succeeded in getting the water from a dark well.
While the little girl was relating these adventures the Tin Woodman sat in an easy chair listening with intense interest, while the others sat grouped around him.
Ojo, however, had kept his eyes fixed upon the body of the tin Emperor, and now he noticed that under the joint of his left knee a tiny drop of oil was forming.
He watched this drop of oil with a fast-beating heart, and feeling in his pocket brought out a tiny vial of crystal, which he held secreted in his hand.
Presently the Tin Woodman changed his position, and at once Ojo, to the astonishment of all, dropped to the floor and held his crystal vial under the Emperor's knee joint. Just then the drop of oil fell, and the boy caught it in his bottle and immediately corked it tight.
Then, with a red face and embarrassed manner, he rose to confront the others.
"What in the world were you doing?"
asked the Tin Woodman.
"I caught a drop of oil that fell from your knee-joint," confessed Ojo.
"A drop of oil!"
exclaimed the Tin Woodman.
"Dear me, how careless my valet must have been in oiling me this morning.
I'm afraid I shall have to scold the fellow, for I can't be dropping oil wherever I go."
"Never mind," said Dorothy.
"Ojo seems glad to have the oil, for some reason."
"Yes," declared the Munchkin boy, "I am glad. For one of the things the Crooked Magician sent me to get was a drop of oil from a live man's body.
I had no idea, at first, that there was such a thing; but it's now safe in the little crystal vial."
"You are very welcome to it, indeed," said the Tin Woodman.
"Have you now secured all the things you were in search of?"
"Not quite all," answered Ojo. "There were five things I had to get, and I have found four of them.
I have the three hairs in the tip of a Woozy's tail, a six-leaved clover, a gill of water from a dark well and a drop of oil from a live man's body.
The last thing is the easiest of all to get, and I'm sure that my dear Unc Nunkie - and good Margolotte, as well - will soon be restored to life."
The Munchkin boy said this with much pride and pleasure.
"Good!"
exclaimed the Tin Woodman; "I congratulate you.
But what is the fifth and last thing you need, in order to complete the magic charm?"
"The left wing of a yellow butterfly," said Ojo.
"In this yellow country, and with your kind assistance, that ought to be very easy to find."
The Tin Woodman stared at him in amazement.
"Surely you are joking!"
he said.
"No," replied Ojo, much surprised; "I am in earnest."
"But do you think for a moment that I would permit you, or anyone else, to pull the left wing from a yellow butterfly?"
demanded the Tin Woodman sternly.
"Why not, sir?"
"Why not? You ask me why not? It would be cruel - one of the most cruel and heartless deeds I ever heard of," asserted the Tin Woodman. "The butterflies are among the prettiest of all created things, and they are very sensitive to pain.
To tear a wing from one would cause it exquisite torture and it would soon die in great agony.
I would not permit such a wicked deed under any circumstances!"
Ojo was astounded at hearing this. Dorothy, too, looked grave and disconcerted, but she knew in her heart that the Tin Woodman was right. The Scarecrow nodded his head in approval of his friend's speech, so it was evident that he agreed with the Emperor's decision.
Scraps looked from one to another in perplexity.
"Who cares for a butterfly?"
she asked.
"Don't you?"
inquired the Tin Woodman.
"Not the snap of a finger, for I have no heart," said the Patchwork Girl.
"But I want to help Ojo, who is my friend, to rescue the uncle whom he loves, and I'd kill a dozen useless butterflies to enable him to do that."
The Tin Woodman sighed regretfully.
"You have kind instincts," he said, "and with a heart you would indeed be a fine creature. I cannot blame you for your heartless remark, as you cannot understand the feelings of those who possess hearts.
I, for instance, have a very neat and responsive heart which the wonderful Wizard of Oz once gave me, and so I shall never - never - never permit a poor yellow butterfly to be tortured by anyone."
"The yellow country of the Winkies," said Ojo sadly, "is the only place in Oz where a yellow butterfly can be found."
"I'm glad of that," said the Tin Woodman.
"As I rule the Winkie Country, I can protect my butterflies."
"Unless I get the wing - just one left wing - " said Ojo miserably, "I can't save Unc Nunkie."
"Then he must remain a marble statue forever," declared the Tin Emperor, firmly.
Ojo wiped his eyes, for he could not hold back the tears.
"I'll tell you what to do," said Scraps.
"We'll take a whole yellow butterfly, alive and well, to the Crooked Magician, and let him pull the left wing off."
"No, you won't," said the Tin Woodman.
"You can't have one of my dear little butterflies to treat in that way."
"Then what in the world shall we do?"
asked Dorothy.
They all became silent and thoughtful.
No one spoke for a long time.
Then the Tin Woodman suddenly roused himself and said:
"We must all go back to the Emerald City and ask Ozma's advice.
She's a wise little girl, our Ruler, and she may find a way to help Ojo save his Unc Nunkie."
So the following morning the party started on the journey to the Emerald City, which they reached in due time without any important adventure.
It was a sad journey for Ojo, for without the wing of the yellow butterfly he saw no way to save Unc Nunkie - unless he waited six years for the Crooked Magician to make a new lot of the Powder of Life.
The boy was utterly discouraged, and as he walked along he groaned aloud.
"Is anything hurting you?"
inquired the Tin Woodman in a kindly tone, for the Emperor was with the party.
"I'm Ojo the Unlucky," replied the boy.
"I might have known I would fail in anything I tried to do."
"Why are you Ojo the Unlucky?"
asked the tin man.
"Because I was born on a Friday."
"Friday is not unlucky," declared the Emperor.
"It's just one of seven days.
Do you suppose all the world becomes unlucky one-seventh of the time?"
"It was the thirteenth day of the month," said Ojo.
"Thirteen! Ah, that is indeed a lucky number," replied the Tin Woodman. "All my good luck seems to happen on the thirteenth.
I suppose most people never notice the good luck that comes to them with the number 13, and yet if the least bit of bad luck falls on that day, they blame it to the number, and not to the proper cause."
"Thirteen's my lucky number, too," remarked the Scarecrow.
"And mine," said Scraps.
"I've just thirteen patches on my head."
"But," continued Ojo, "I'm left-handed."
"Many of our greatest men are that way," asserted the Emperor.
"To be left-handed is usually to be two-handed; the right-handed people are usually one-handed."
"And I've a wart under my right arm," said Ojo.
"How lucky!"
cried the Tin Woodman.
"If it were on the end of your nose it might be unlucky, but under your arm it is luckily out of the way."
"For all those reasons," said the Munchkin boy, "I have been called Ojo the Unlucky."
"Then we must turn over a new leaf and call you henceforth Ojo the Lucky," declared the tin man. "Every reason you have given is absurd.
But I have noticed that those who continually dread ill luck and fear it will overtake them, have no time to take advantage of any good fortune that comes their way.
Make up your mind to be Ojo the Lucky."
"How can I?"
asked the boy, "when all my attempts to save my dear uncle have failed?"
"Never give up, Ojo," advised Dorothy.
"No one ever knows what's going to happen next."
Ojo did not reply, but he was so dejected that even their arrival at the Emerald City failed to interest him.
The people joyfully cheered the appearance of the Tin Woodman, the Scarecrow and Dorothy, who were all three general favorites, and on entering the royal palace word came to them from Ozma that she would at once grant them an audience.
Dorothy told the girl Ruler how successful they had been in their quest until they came to the item of the yellow butterfly, which the Tin Woodman positively refused to sacrifice to the magic potion.
"He is quite right," said Ozma, who did not seem a bit surprised. "Had Ojo told me that one of the things he sought was the wing of a yellow butterfly I would have informed him, before he started out, that he could never secure it.
Then you would have been saved the troubles and annoyances of your long journey."
"I didn't mind the journey at all," said Dorothy; "it was fun."
"As it has turned out," remarked Ojo, "I can never get the things the Crooked Magician sent me for; and so, unless I wait the six years for him to make the Powder of Life, Unc Nunkie cannot be saved."
Ozma smiled.
"Dr. Pipt will make no more Powder of Life, I promise you," said she. "I have sent for him and had him brought to this palace, where he now is, and his four kettles have been destroyed and his book of recipes burned up.
I have also had brought here the marble statues of your uncle and of Margolotte, which are standing in the next room."
They were all greatly astonished at this announcement.
"Oh, let me see Unc Nunkie!
Let me see him at once, please!"
cried Ojo eagerly.
"Wait a moment," replied Ozma, "for I have something more to say. Nothing that happens in the Land of Oz escapes the notice of our wise Sorceress, Glinda the Good.
She knew all about the magic-making of Dr. Pipt, and how he had brought the Glass Cat and the Patchwork Girl to life, and the accident to Unc Nunkie and Margolotte, and of Ojo's quest and his journey with Dorothy.
Glinda also knew that Ojo would fail to find all the things he sought, so she sent for our Wizard and instructed him what to do.
Something is going to happen in this palace, presently, and that 'something' will, I am sure, please you all.
And now," continued the girl Ruler, rising from her chair, "you may follow me into the next room."
When Ojo entered the room he ran quickly to the statue of Unc Nunkie and kissed the marble face affectionately.
"I did my best, Unc," he said, with a sob, "but it was no use!"
Then he drew back and looked around the room, and the sight of the assembled company quite amazed him.
Aside from the marble statues of Unc Nunkie and Margolotte, the Glass Cat was there, curled up on a rug; and the Woozy was there, sitting on its square hind legs and looking on the scene with solemn interest; and there was the Shaggy Man, in a suit of shaggy pea-green satin, and at a table sat the little Wizard, looking quite important and as if he knew much more than he cared to tell.
Last of all, Dr. Pipt was there, and the Crooked Magician sat humped up in a chair, seeming very dejected but keeping his eyes fixed on the lifeless form of his wife Margolotte, whom he fondly loved but whom he now feared was lost to him forever.
Ozma took a chair which Jellia Jamb wheeled forward for the Ruler, and back of her stood the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman and Dorothy, as well as the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger.
The Wizard now arose and made a low bow to Ozma and another less deferent bow to the assembled company.
"Ladies and gentlemen and beasts," he said, "I beg to announce that our Gracious Ruler has permitted me to obey the commands of the great Sorceress, Glinda the Good, whose humble Assistant I am proud to be.
We have discovered that the Crooked Magician has been indulging in his magical arts contrary to Law, and therefore, by Royal Edict, I hereby deprive him of all power to work magic in the future.
He is no longer a crooked magician, but a simple Munchkin; he is no longer even crooked, but a man like other men."
As he pronounced these words the Wizard waved his hand toward Dr. Pipt and instantly every crooked limb straightened out and became perfect.
The former magician, with a cry of joy, sprang to his feet, looked at himself in wonder, and then fell back in his chair and watched the Wizard with fascinated interest.
"The Glass Cat, which Dr. Pipt lawlessly made," continued the Wizard, "is a pretty cat, but its pink brains made it so conceited that it was a disagreeable companion to everyone.
So the other day I took away the pink brains and replaced them with transparent ones, and now the Glass Cat is so modest and well behaved that Ozma has decided to keep her in the palace as a pet."
"I thank you," said the cat, in a soft voice.
"The Woozy has proved himself a good Woozy and a faithful friend," the Wizard went on, "so we will send him to the Royal Menagerie, where he will have good care and plenty to eat all his life."
"Much obliged," said the Woozy.
"That beats being fenced up in a lonely forest and starved."
"As for the Patchwork Girl," resumed the Wizard, "she is so remarkable in appearance, and so clever and good tempered, that our Gracious Ruler intends to preserve her carefully, as one of the curiosities of the curious Land of Oz.
Scraps may live in the palace, or wherever she pleases, and be nobody's servant but her own."
"That's all right," said Scraps.
"We have all been interested in Ojo," the little Wizard continued, "because his love for his unfortunate uncle has led him bravely to face all sorts of dangers, in order that he might rescue him.
The Munchkin boy has a loyal and generous heart and has done his best to restore Unc Nunkie to life.
He has failed, but there are others more powerful than the Crooked Magician, and there are more ways than Dr. Pipt knew of to destroy the charm of the Liquid of Petrifaction.
Glinda the Good has told me of one way, and you shall now learn how great is the knowledge and power of our peerless Sorceress."
As he said this the Wizard advanced to the statue of Margolote and made a magic pass, at the same time muttering a magic word that none could hear distinctly.
At once the woman moved, turned her head wonderingly this way and that, to note all who stood before her, and seeing Dr. Pipt, ran forward and threw herself into her husband's outstretched arms.
Then the Wizard made the magic pass and spoke the magic word before the statue of Unc Nunkie.
The old Munchkin immediately came to life and with a low bow to the Wizard said: "Thanks."
But now Ojo rushed up and threw his arms joyfully about his uncle, and the old man hugged his little nephew tenderly and stroked his hair and wiped away the boy's tears with a handkerchief, for Ojo was crying from pure happiness.
Ozma came forward to congratulate them.
"I have given to you, my dear Ojo and Unc Nunkie, a nice house just outside the walls of the Emerald City," she said, "and there you shall make your future home and be under my protection."
"Didn't I say you were Ojo the Lucky?"
asked the Tin Woodman, as everyone crowded around to shake Ojo's hand.
"Yes; and it is true!"
replied Ojo, gratefully.