Food provides you with the energy needed for everything you do and with all the chemicals your body needs to grow, to repair damage, and to stay healthy.
When you take a mouthful of food, you probably enjoy the taste.
Depending on what you are eating, you might expect your food to be good for you, too.
But what if the food you eat actually makes you sick?
If food looks or smells bad, chances are you won’t eat it, but could there be hidden dangers that you cannot detect?
We generally take it for granted that our food is safe - but how safe is it really?
As many as 925 million people were suffering from chronic hunger in 2010, according to the United Nations, and more than 14,000 children were dying every day from hunger-related causes.
In most developed countries, however, there is plenty of food.
What worries many people in these countries is not whether they have enough food, but whether the food they do have is safe to eat.
While some people are anxious that there might be hidden problems with their food, others are happy to accept assurances from governments and producers that the food is perfectly safe.
Strict regulations cover every aspect of food production, from growing crops and raising animals through to processing, packaging, storage, and sale.
There are rigorous standards, and officials check that these standards are maintained.
 These workers are arranging fish sticks into rows at a food-processing factory.
Today much of our food is produced in similar factories.
Expert View “After combining the estimates for the major known pathogens and the unspecified agents, [the CDC concludes that] the overall annual estimate of the total burden of disease due to contaminated food consumed in the United States is 47.8 million illnesses, 127,839 hospitalizations, and 3,037 deaths.”
US Dept.
of Health & Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) website, 2011
The potential dangers fall into three main categories: • Genetic modification (GM) This scientific technique can be used to produce new foods, but despite reassurances from scientists, not everybody is convinced that GM foods are safe. •
Chemicals These may be added at various stages of food production and processing, and some may not be good for us. •
Microbes Eating food contaminated by some microbes can cause serious illness.
Our ancient ancestors lived on whatever food they could find: they roamed to hunt animals and to seek out edible plant parts such as fruits, berries, and nuts.
Over many thousands of years, a gradual change took place.
People sowed seeds, tended plants, and harvested crops.
They domesticated and looked after animals to provide themselves with milk, eggs, and meat.
Early farmers grew what they and their families or social groups needed, relying on native plants and animals that were suited to the environment in which they lived.
Gradually, processes of selection began to occur.
For example, by choosing to plant seed, from only the strongest, healthiest plants, farmers ensured that future generations of plants would be even stronger and healthier.
They also found ways of storing food so that even in winter, when fresh food was scarce, there was something to eat.
Drying, smoking, salting, and pickling all helped to preserve food until it was needed.
 This photograph from 1939 shows a woman sorting peas in her storeroom, with the previous year’s preserved fruits and vegetables in jars and cans on the shelves and floor around her.
As societies and civilizations developed, farming methods became increasingly organized and sophisticated.
Explorers and traders brought new foods from distant lands, expanding the range of foods available.
The nineteenth and twentieth centuries were periods of rapid progress.
Electricity and machinery speeded up many processes previously done by hand, while steam ships, trains, and airplanes reduced journey times.
Some scientists unraveled the secrets of genetics and inheritance, while others investigated chemicals.
They studied microbes and developed ways of combating them.
New materials such as plastic were invented, and household appliances such as refrigerators and freezers became commonplace.
Everyday life was transformed.
FORUM
People hold different views about the merits of traditional versus modern farming methods: “I believe there is a real and prosperous future for the traditional family farm, in some cases on a more diversified basis - although I know very many farmers have already taken those steps… I would be astonished and dismayed if we were to see the disappearance of the traditional family farm.”
Margaret Beckett, UK environment secretary, 2001 “There is a need to continue to intensify farming.
Organic farming has a place but it will never feed the growing population of the world.”
Bill McKelvey, head of the Scottish Agricultural College, 2007
Which type of farming do you think offers the best hope for the future?
All these changes have affected the food we eat.
Small fields have been combined to make large fields suitable for modern agricultural machinery.
Crop yields have been increased through the use of chemicals.
Animals are raised in conditions specifically calculated to allow more food to be produced more quickly and in smaller spaces.
Chemicals are used to improve the look or taste of food and to help it last longer.
Organisms can now be changed in laboratories in ways that would once have taken many years of selective breeding.
And global transportation means that we can have fresh food from anywhere in the world - at any time of the year.
Every living thing is made up of tiny units called cells.
Each cell contains a set of instructions, known as its genetic code or genome, which controls everything that happens in the organism.
Genetic engineering is a technique that can be used to change the genetic code of a living organism.
 This diagram shows the set of 23 chromosomes that make up the human genome.
Each chromosome contains many genes, and each gene is made from linked base pairs of DNA.
The genetic information is contained in tiny double-stranded threadlike structures inside the nucleus.
These threads are called chromosomes, and each piece of information that they carry is called a gene.
Geneticists often visualize the genes lined up along the chromosomes like beads on a necklace.
Chromosomes contain a chemical called deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which has a complicated double helix structure, made up from pairs of molecules called bases.
There are four bases - adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T).
Each gene is made up of a specific sequence of bases.
Geneticists have worked out the sequence of genes and the sequence of bases that make up the genes for many organisms.
This means that they know which part of a chromosome carries the gene for a particular characteristic and exactly what the code is for each gene.
Expert View “We’ll have plants that survive drought.
We’ll have plants that have more nutrition.
And we’ll have plants that have new uses and be able to benefit the farming community, the economics of farming, as well as [the] environment.”
Roger Beachy, plant pathologist, talking about the benefits of genetic engineering, 2007
By using enzymes to split a DNA molecule at two precise points, it is possible to remove a gene from a chromosome.
Scientists can take a gene from the chromosome of one organism and insert it into the chromosome of another organism.
This means that they can transfer a characteristic of one organism into another.
This is the basis of genetic engineering.
An organism whose genetic code has been changed by genetic engineering is said to have been genetically modified, often shortened to GM.
Genes can be swapped within a species to create new combinations.
For example, a gene from a plant variety that produces a few large fruits might be transferred to the genome of a plant from the same variety that produces many small fruits, giving a new variety that produces many large fruits.
 These fruits are the result of genetic engineering between plums and apricots.
The fruits on the left are apriums and those on the right are pluots.
Genes can be swapped from the genome of one organism into the genome of a very different organism.
For example, ordinary tomato plants cannot survive cold weather.
To create a tomato that can, scientists looked for an organism that could survive cold conditions.
They chose a dogfish (a small shark), removed the frost-resistant gene from its chromosomes, and inserted this gene into tomato plant chromosomes.
The resulting organism has all the usual tomato plant characteristics plus the frost-resistant characteristic of the dogfish.
Creating a genetically modified organism is a slow and expensive process.
On average, it can take between five and 10 years and cost as much as $50 million to $100 million.
First, scientists have to decide which organism they want to modify.
This is called the host organism, since it is the one that will receive the new genetic material.
Then scientists must identify which characteristic of the host organism they want to modify.
The next step is to identify an organism that has the characteristic the scientists want to transfer to the host.
This is called the donor organism, since genetic material will be taken from it.
Having found a suitable donor organism, the scientists need to analyze its genome to find the gene or genes that carry the code for the specified characteristic.
The third step is to extract the gene or genes that carry the code for the required characteristic from the rest of the donor organism’s DNA.
Enzymes are used to do this, splitting the DNA at very precise points to extract only the section that is needed.
FOCUS
GM success
Stuart Armitage and his family began to grow cotton in Australia in 1993.
From the beginning, the Armitages had trouble with a pest called the corn earworm.
They found it difficult and expensive to control the earworm with chemical sprays.
In 1999, they switched to a GM variety of cotton called Bollgard, II, which seems to have solved their problems.
Stuart says: “Thanks to Bollgard II cotton, we now have a more relaxed family life (no spraying every other night of the week), and I feel good about our pest management practices.”
The fourth step is to insert this piece of donor DNA into the host organism.
This procedure can be carried out in several different ways, but the oldest and most common method is creating recombinant DNA.
In this technique, the gene is inserted into a ring of DNA, called a plasmid, from a bacterium or virus.
The bacterium or virus is then injected into the host cells and the new gene finds its way into the host’s DNA.
The bacterium or virus thus acts as a carrier, or vector, for the gene that is being transferred into the host.
 In this example of genetic engineering, a gene for yellowness is transferred from a yellow pepper plant via a bacterium to a red tomato plant.
The process creates a new plant that will produce yellow tomatoes.
Once the new gene has been inserted, the host organism can be grown and tested.
Scientists check that the new gene has been incorporated into the organism’s genome and that the new characteristic is present.
Further tests must prove that the organism has not been changed in some other, unexpected way that makes it harmful, dangerous, or less viable than the original.
Initial tests are on a small number of organisms in a closely controlled environment.
When scientists are sure the organism is safe, larger-scale tests on more organisms can be done.
Finally, full commercial-scale trials can take place.
Once all the testing stages are complete, the organism may be licensed and released for commercial use.
GM foods are grown for various reasons.
These include • Herbicide resistance Herbicides can be used to kill weeds - but they also kill the crop plants.
Some GM crops are resistant to herbicides, which means that farmers can spray whole fields.
One example is a strain of soybean called Roundup Ready.
First planted commercially in 1996, it is resistant to a weed killer called Roundup.
Farmers can plant the beans straight into the soil without clearing the ground of weeds first.
They can then spray with Roundup during the growing period, killing the weeds but not damaging the crop. •
Pest resistance Some insects can cause serious damage to crop plants.
However, there is a soil bacterium, Bacillus thuringiensis, that releases a toxin that can kill susceptible pests.
When the gene for toxin production is transferred into the crop genome, the plant itself produces the toxin.
Insects that try to eat the plant will then be killed.
This means that the farmer does not need to use pesticides to control crop pests. •
Disease resistance Some crops are badly affected by fungal and viral diseases.
By creating GM crop plants that are resistant to such diseases, the damage to the crop is reduced. •
Stress resistance Plants naturally grow better under some conditions than others.
GM crops are being developed that allow a plant to thrive under conditions in which it would normally die or be very weak.
This opens up the possibility of growing crops in new places.
Current research into Xerophyta viscosa, a plant from South Africa, shows that it is extremely good at surviving in drought conditions.
Transferring the gene for drought resistance to a food crop plant might make possible growing food in arid areas. •
New characteristics Using GM techniques, scientists can create crops with new characteristics.
One example is “golden rice”.
Ordinary rice is low in the chemicals needed for vitamin A production in the body, so vitamin A deficiency is common in areas where rice is the staple food.
Golden rice contains much higher levels of these chemicals and so can help to reduce vitamin A deficiency.
Scientists are also working on developing crops that could carry vaccines and other pharmacological chemicals.
 The barley in this field has been genetically engineered to produce a higher yield than normal barley.
More food can be obtained from the field, so more people can be fed.
In countries where there are food shortages, such crops could be very important.
Some plants have been developed that carry more than one of these characteristics.
For example, herbicide tolerance and insect resistance can be transferred together to create a herbicide-tolerant and insect-resistant plant.
Expert View “The new developments in the area of GM animals…necessitate a harmonized approach to maintain our current standard for a safe and nutritious food supply in the light of growing numbers of different (GMO-derived) foods and food ingredients and increasingly complex food supply chains.”
Esther J. Kok and Wendelyn Jones, “The Food Safety Risk Assessment of GM Animals” (working paper for the FAO/WHO), 2003
Although much research into the genetic modification of agricultural animals is being done, for example, to develop a GM pig that produces leaner meat than a normal pig or a GM salmon that grows faster and larger than a normal salmon, no GM animal products are currently licensed for human consumption.
However, GM crops are used in the production of many animal feedstuffs.
Genetic modification is controversial.
Some people see it as the answer to many of the world’s health and food problems.
Others think that we can hardly begin to understand or assess the potential hazards posed by GM techniques because they are still so new.
Some regard it as interfering with nature in a way that is against their religious beliefs or ethical standpoint.
 Some people are convinced that GM crops are dangerous to humans and to the environment.
Here a group of anti-GM protesters is attempting to destroy a test GM crop.
The potential benefits of genetic engineering in food production have been outlined on pages 14 and 15.
The potential risks of genetic engineering include • The cross-fertilization of GM plants with native species, possibly damaging the native species in a way that cannot be reversed or controlled • Interaction with other species that may have a negative effect on the ecosystem as a whole • The possibility of causing changes to other characteristics of the organism, making the organism harmful to humans • The introduction of different gene mixes into the human food chain by transferring genes from nonfood species into food plants, which may be harmful to human health • The possible transfer of allergy from one food to another.
For example, the transfer of a gene from a peanut plant into another plant could also transfer the characteristic of the peanut that makes people allergic to it.
These people would then be allergic to the new plant as well as to peanuts. •
Some GM plants are sterile.
This means that farmers cannot save seed from one year to plant in the following year.
Instead, they have to buy new seed from the biotech company, which is an extra and possibly unaffordable expense for many poor farmers.
FORUM
People have very different views about the possible benefits and risks of GM food: “Over the next several years, crop biotechnology will be applied to the development of crops important to the expanding populations of the developing world.
In addition, crops with enhanced nutritional properties and even containing vaccines will appear over the next five to 10 years.
Such products should further enhance consumer acceptance of this new technology.”
Susan K. Harlander, The Evolution of Modern Agriculture and Its Future with Biotechnology, 2001 “Technologies for genetically modifying (GM) foods offer dramatic promise for meeting some areas of greatest challenge for the twenty-first century.
Like all new technologies, they also pose some risks, both known and unknown.
Controversies surrounding GM foods and crops commonly focus on human and environmental safety, labeling and consumer choice, intellectual property rights, ethics, food security, poverty reduction, and environmental conservation.”
US Department of Energy Office of Science, Human Genome Project
Do the benefits of GM food outweigh the possible risks?
Chemicals have been added to fresh foods for hundreds of years.
In the days before refrigeration, fresh meat was often stored in barrels of salt water and fresh vegetables were pickled in jars of vinegar.
These chemicals helped to preserve the food.
In recent years, however, the range of chemicals added to our foods has increased dramatically.
In the past, individual families or small communities grew, prepared, and cooked the food they needed.
Now we buy most of our food from stores, and much of it is processed and packaged.
Even fresh foods such as vegetables are often wrapped in plastic or enclosed cartons.
As the world’s population increases, more people need to be fed, so the land has to be more productive.
Using chemicals on crops can help to increase the amount of food produced.
Chemicals are also used to alter food in various ways.
The table shows some of the different types of chemicals that are added and why they are used.
FOCUS
Mercury alert
Marine biologists have recorded an increase in the levels of some chemicals in fish, especially those at the top of marine food chains such as shark, marlin, swordfish and tuna.
One chemical that has caused concern is mercury.
High levels of mercury can lead to damage to the brain and nerves, especially in young children and babies.
An example is the case of Matthew Davis, a bright and alert 10-year-old from California.
When Matthew began to have learning difficulties, his parents became worried and took him to a doctor.
Blood tests showed he was suffering from mercury poisoning.
Matthew regularly ate white albacore tuna, and this was blamed for his illness.
Tuna is an excellent source of many nutrients, but some governments now suggest that people should limit their intake to one or two portions a week.
Some chemicals are added to foods to provide extra nutrients.
For example, thiamine, a vitamin needed to maintain health, is added to many breakfast cereals.
Some eggs are now available with added omega-3 fatty acids, which are thought to help brain activity.
Folic acid, a vitamin that helps to prevent nerve defects in newborn babies, is added to some flours and breads.
Sometimes chemicals get into our food by accident.
Chemicals that pollute rivers and seas are ingested by fish.
Chemicals from car exhausts are taken up by food crops growing close to busy roads.
Accidental contamination of food can occur during its processing at a factory.
Wrapping and packaging materials may contain chemicals that can affect the food inside.
Even some methods of cooking add chemicals to food - for example, food cooked on a barbecue is likely to pick up chemicals from the smoke.
 A researcher investigates the contamination of food by chemicals in its packaging that occurs when the food is cooked in a microwave oven.
Occasionally, there are news reports about intentional contamination of food at a factory or on supermarket shelves.
In most cases, this has been done by an individual who wants to cause trouble either for the community or for the business.
These incidents are rare, and businesses, supermarkets, and authorities act swiftly to minimize any risk to the public from contaminated products.
Plants and animals need nutrients just as we do if they are to develop properly and stay healthy.
Many chemicals are now available to farmers to help them maximize the growth and yield of their crops and livestock.
In the past, some agricultural chemicals were found to be dangerous to human health, and their use is now banned in many countries.
Expert View “The contamination of food by chemical hazards is a worldwide public health concern and is a leading cause of trade problems internationally.
Contamination may occur through environmental pollution of the air, water, and soil, such as the case with toxic metals, PCBs [polychlorinated biphenyls: chemicals used in some industries] and dioxins [chemicals produced by waste incinerators and chemical plants] or through the intentional use of various chemicals, such as pesticides, animal drugs, and other agrochemicals.”
WHO website “Chemical Risks in Food”
There are four main types of chemical that are added to crops: • Fertilizers These contain nutrients needed by a plant to grow and maintain health.
Some fertilizers are from natural sources, such as manure or seaweed, while others are man-made mixtures of specific chemicals that are designed to suit a specific type of crop. •
Herbicides In an open field, seeds from weeds can germinate and grow among the crop plants.
The weeds take nutrients from the soil, take up space that the crop plants could fill, and make it harder to harvest the crop.
Applying herbicides prevents weed growth and so reduces these problems. •
Pesticides Slugs, caterpillars, aphids, beetles - a wide variety of pests attack crop plants, causing damage and reducing the yield.
Pesticides help to prevent this from happening.
Some kill pests that touch a treated part of the plant; some are taken up by the plant and kill pests inside the plant. •
Fungicides These are used to control and prevent fungal infection in plants.
Most fungicides are sprayed or dusted onto growing plants, but some are used to treat seeds and soil to prevent the growth of fungal spores.
Several different types of chemical are available for use in animal husbandry.
Regulations governing their use vary since some chemicals are permitted in some countries but banned in others. •
Antibiotics These are used to cure infections, as they are in humans.
In some cases, they are given to healthy animals to prevent infection. •
Vaccines Vaccination provides an alternative to antibiotics for controlling infectious diseases in farm animals. •
Hormones Animals, like humans, produce hormones that regulate their growth.
Giving animals extra growth hormones can change their growth patterns to produce larger animals and therefore more food.
Hormones given to dairy cattle can increase their milk yield. •
Pesticides Animals can suffer from infections by pests such as roundworms.
Doses of pesticides can be used to prevent these.
 A vet prepares a syringe for the vaccination of pregnant sows in the pens where the pigs are kept to give birth.
Many people are not comfortable with the idea of using chemicals in food production.
Organic food is produced without the addition of any chemicals to the soil, crops, or animals.
Although organic foods are sometimes claimed to be safer and nutritionally superior to foods produced by non-organic methods, there has as yet been no certain scientific proof either way.
People have been adding substances to their food to improve its taste and appearance for hundreds of years.
Salt, pepper, herbs, spices, sugar, and honey are all natural ways of making food taste better.
During the twentieth century, the proportion of food being cooked at home from fresh, raw ingredients decreased, and many people now rely heavily on convenience foods such as TV dinners.
Most convenience foods are prepared in huge batches, and they are often stored for long periods.
Manufacturers add various chemicals to ensure that these foods retain their freshness, appearance, and flavor.
 Some candies, like those in this photograph, are made using only natural colorings.
Flavor enhancers, such as salt, are added to bring out the flavor of food.
Monosodium glutamate (MSG) is a common flavor enhancer that is added to processed foods.
Preservatives are added to foods to prevent them from spoiling.
The air is full of microbes, such as fungal spores and bacteria, and in a warm, moist atmosphere, these microbes can easily grow on food and make it unsafe to eat.
Preservatives prevent this from happening.
Two common preservatives are sorbic acid, which is widely used in drinks, dairy products, seafood and baked goods, and sulfur dioxide, which prevents bacterial growth and is used to preserve dried apricots, sausage meat, and jams.
As their name suggests, colorings add color to a food.
They might be added to a food that loses color when it is cooked, such as some varieties of peas.
They might also be added to make something look brighter and more attractive; to make a fruit drink look oranger, for example.
Some colorings are natural: there is a red coloring that is made from the cochineal insect Dactylopius coccus.
Others, such as tartrazine (yellow) and amaranth (purple), are synthetic chemicals.
Ingredients: glucose syrup • sugar • strawberry, black currant, lemon, orange, apple juices (4.4%) • hydrogenated vegetable oil • citric acid E330 • gelatine • egg white • Flavorings • Colors E104 E122 E110 E127 E1 32 E142 • Emulsifier E322.
This list of ingredients from a packet of chewy candies shows that the candies contain chemical colorings.
In the European Union each coloring has an individual E number.
E numbers are used throughout the processed food industry to identify chemical additives.
FOCUS
Sudan Red
In February 2005, hundreds of food products around the world were withdrawn from sale.
They all contained a chemical called Sudan Red, a dye used in making oils, waxes, and polishes that has been linked to an increased risk of cancer.
The source of the contamination was found to be chili powder that had been used in Worcestershire Sauce - itself an ingredient in a wide range of products.
Graham Randall of Greggs, an English bakery company, said: “We were told by Premier Foods that this product was used in certain things… They were instantly taken off the shelves and have not been on sale since…”
Emulsifiers help to stop the separation of ingredients such as oil and water.
They are widely used in foods such as ice cream, mayonnaise, margarine, bread, cakes, and sweets.
A common emulsifier is lecithin, which is often made from soybeans or eggs.
Gelling agents help to give food shape and structure and prevent it from being runny.
Pectin is a natural gelling agent used in making jams and jellies.
Thickeners help to thicken a food and are particularly useful in the production of low-fat and low-sugar foods.
Stabilizers help to preserve the physical characteristics of a product.
For example, they keep ice crystals from forming in ice cream and keep oil and water from separating in sauces and dressings.
Stabilizers are vital ingredients in long-life dairy products such as yogurts.
This chapter has explored some of the ways in which chemicals end up in our foods.
It has shown the types of chemicals that are added to foods, how they are added, and why they are added.
But why are some people unhappy about these added chemicals?
Traces of chemicals sprayed onto crop plants during growth can still be present on the food we eat, and there is some evidence that these chemicals are harmful to humans.
Some chemicals can remain in the soil for many years, contaminating future crops.
Chemical residues from vaccines, hormones, and pesticides can remain in meat, milk, and other animal products and thus enter the human food chain.
There has also been concern in recent years that overuse of antibiotics in farm animals could lead to the development of more antibiotic-resistant strains of microbes.
This is because although most bacteria are killed when they are exposed to an antibiotic, a few stronger ones may survive and adapt to living with low levels of antibiotics, giving rise to “resistant bacteria” that antibiotics cannot kill.
The more antibiotics that are used, the more likely this is to happen.
 These smoked haddock fillets are ready to be packed.
Their orange color comes from a chemical dye, which is used to make them look more attractive.
FORUM
Should we worry about the additives in our foods? “
The public should not be worried about additives because they have all been rigorously tested before they are allowed to be added to foods.”
Sarah Schenker, nutrition scientist for the British Nutrition Foundation, 1999 “I think we have got to the point now where it is no longer acceptable to continue to allow the food industry to add artificial colors to products deliberately targeted and marketed to babies and children.”
Erik Millstone, professor of science policy at the University of Sussex, 2007
Do the benefits of adding chemicals to foods outweigh the possible risks?
To protect the public, samples of a wide range of foods are regularly tested by government agencies.
Any that are found to contain dangerous chemical contamination or residue are withdrawn from sale and the source of the foods is investigated to prevent a recurrence of the problem.
Some scientists think that certain food additives, such as tartrazine, may be linked to behavioral problems in children as well as to conditions including allergies, asthma, and migraine.
Other reports have linked saccharin to cancer in laboratory mice, and aspartame to changes in brain function.
However, all food additives are tested rigorously before they are allowed to be added to foods.
Any that are proven to be unsafe are banned.
Although all chemicals are tested before they can be used on crops or animals or added to foods during processing, some people think that we do not know enough about their possible long-term effects.
It can be argued that chemicals now thought to be safe may in the future be found to be harmful.
Microbes, or microorganisms, are tiny living things that are too small to be seen with the naked eye.
They include bacteria, viruses, and fungi.
Some microbes can themselves make food turn bad, while others release substances that can make people sick.
Not all microbes in food are bad news - some are introduced on purpose and have beneficial effects!
FOCUS
E. coli outbreak
On August 27, 2006, Ruby Trautz, an 81-year-old woman from Nebraska, was rushed to the hospital.
She was given morphine to relieve her pain, but there was little else doctors could do.
She died four days later from a food-borne infection that was later identified as a virulent strain of E. coli.
More cases followed, and by September, it became apparent that there was a major outbreak of E. coli food poisoning.
Scientists traced the source of the outbreak to fresh spinach and suggested that the bacteria may have been transferred to the spinach from contaminated water used for irrigation.
At least 199 people in 28 states were infected, of whom 141 were taken to the hospital and three died.
Unwanted microbes get into our food in a variety of ways, and contamination may occur at any stage.
Most microbes require warmth and moisture to grow, but given these conditions, they can multiply quickly in or on food.
 An electron microscope was used to photograph these Escherichia coli bacteria.
Some strains of E. coli can cause severe illness.
If we eat food contaminated by microbes, the microbes enter our bodies.
Some cause food poisoning.
The table shows the five types of bacteria that are responsible for most cases of food poisoning.
Although bacteria are the main source of food poisoning, some viruses are dangerous too.
For example, calicivirus (also called Norwalk-like virus), causes acute vomiting and diarrhea.
This virus spreads from one infected person to another, so food can be contaminated if handled by infected workers.
Microbes that are added to our foods intentionally include • Baking yeast A type of fungus that makes bread and other doughs rise. •
Molds Some cheeses, such as blue Stilton and Roquefort, are intentionally infected with specific molds to add flavor and coloring. •
Bacteria Some products that are labeled “probiotic” contain bacteria that can help the digestive system to function well.
 The characteristic blue coloring of this Stilton cheese is due to the deliberate growth of mold in the cheese.
Microbes are all around us, in air, soil, water, people, and animals and on most surfaces.
Microbes can be transferred to fruit, vegetables, and other crops from many different sources.
The soil in which a crop is grown may contain microbes from previous plants.
Water used for irrigation or to wash a crop may be contaminated.
Wild, farm, or domestic animals that come close to crops may transfer microbes to the plants.
Machinery and other equipment used in harvesting a crop may be contaminated.
In order to minimize the risk of microbial contamination of crops, most producers follow rigorous guidelines.
Many fresh fruits and vegetables also have their own natural barrier, such as skin or peel, which reduces the likelihood of microbes reaching the edible parts inside.
 The skin of this apple acts as a natural barrier to microbes.
Microbes can infect farm animals.
In many cases, the animal itself does not get sick, but the microbes remain in the animal’s products - eggs, milk, or meat - which are then consumed by humans.
Farm animals can become infected through their environment; for example, from contact with other infected animals or their waste, or with contaminated feed or water, equipment, machinery, or workers.
Most farmers are extremely careful to prevent any infections from arising in their livestock.
Prions are proteins (not microbes) that can cause brain and nervous system diseases including bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE, or “mad cow disease”) in cows and scrapie in sheep and goats.
Although scrapie, a nervous system disease, has not been found to infect humans, the BSE prion can causing Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Scientists do not fully understand how prion diseases are contracted or spread, but it has been suggested that contaminated feedstuffs may be one source of infection of farm animals.
Expert View “The public generally perceives agricultural residues, pesticides, and veterinary drugs as the major sources of health risks, but they are not.
In Europe, for example, they account for just 0.5 percent of foodborne illnesses.
More common, and possibly increasing in frequency, is contamination by bacteria, protozoa, parasites, viruses, and fungi or their toxins, introduced during food handling.”
FAO fact sheet, “Food Quality and Safety”, 2001
Many food crops and some animal products such as eggs are packaged on the farms where they are produced and then transported to retailers or directly to users.
Others are transported to factories or processing plants.
However, both fresh foods and processed foods are stored before being bought and eaten, and microbes can contaminate the foods at any stage.
For example, microbes can be transferred to a food from contaminated workers or equipment or from one food to another - called cross-contamination.
Food producers, packagers, transporters, and retailers take great care to prevent any contamination.
 Strict hygiene precautions are taken at food-processing plants such as this one where milk is put into containers.
Most milk is pasteurized first, which kills any microbes present.
In June 2006, Cadbury Schweppes detected tiny amounts of salmonella in some of its chocolate products.
The company told the Food Standards Agency, the regulating authority in the UK, about the problem.
It also recalled more than 1 million chocolate bars from stores and issued a press release advising people not to eat any bars they might already have bought.
An investigation suggested that the source of the outbreak was a leaking pipe at the Cadbury Schweppes factory in Herefordshire.
Altogether, 37 people were reported to have become sick as a result of eating the infected chocolate - and the incident may have cost Cadbury Schweppes more than $40 million in profits.
In most developed countries, strict rules are in force to minimize the chances of food becoming contaminated with microbes during processing and storage.
The problems are much greater in poorer countries, however, where political, social, and environmental circumstances often make it impossible to maintain high standards of hygiene.
 These girls in Mali have only muddy river water to wash their dishes in, but washing and cleaning in dirty water can lead to infections from parasites, bacteria, or other microbes.
Although microbial contamination of our food is always possible, there are steps that can be taken to minimize the risks to human health.
Food producers, processors, and packagers reduce the risk of contamination by thorough cleaning of equipment and premises and by maintaining good hygiene standards for their workers.
Keeping different types of food apart also helps to prevent cross-contamination.
Most microbes need warmth and moisture to multiply.
Storing foods at low temperatures in a refrigerator or freezer prevents microbes from growing.
Some foods, such as peas and beans, are dried for storage to prevent microbe growth.
Vinegar, used for pickling, also prevents microbe growth, as does salt.
Expert View “Microbial contamination is commonplace where hygiene is poor, frequently because of lack of access to clean water.
It is a major source of illness, especially among children.”
FAO fact sheet, “Food Quality and Safety”, 2001
The high temperatures of heat treatments such as pasteurization kill any microbes present.
Other methods for killing microbes include the use of irradiation and ultraviolet light.
Irradiation damages the DNA of any microbes that are in the food.
This means that the microbes are unable to multiply and so the food is safe to eat.
There are three different technologies that can be used to irradiate food, and the table shows the advantages and disadvantages of each method.
There are steps that individuals can and should take to minimize the risk of contracting a food-borne microbial infection.
Remember the four key words - the four Cs: 1.
Clean Keep your hands, utensils, and cooking area clean at all times.
2.
Cook Make sure all food is thoroughly cooked.
3.
Chill Avoid leaving fresh produce and leftover food at room temperature - put it in the fridge right away.
4.
Don’t cross-contaminate Wash your hands and any utensils after they have been in contact with food and before they touch another food.
Keep raw meat and cooked meats apart.
 In this refrigerator, the raw meat (left) and cooked meat (right) are stored on separate plates.
Both plates are wrapped.
These measures can help to prevent bacterial contamination that could lead to food poisoning.
If you do contract a foodborne microbial infection, reduce the risk of it spreading by avoiding contact with vulnerable people.
Reporting the outbreak to your doctor or local public health department is also advisable.
FORUM
Do individuals know enough about the risks to avoid microbial contamination of their food, and do they act on this information? “
With busy lifestyles, we know food safety isn’t always [at the] top of [people’s] mind[s], so FDF [the Food and Drink Federation] is working hard with schools, local authorities, and businesses across the UK to raise awareness of the follow the four Cs message to help people continue to enjoy and keep their food safe once it’s left the shop shelf.”
Melanie Leech, Director General, Food and Drink Federation, 2006 “The best news about food safety is that one doesn’t have to be a rocket scientist to do it properly.
The bad news is that even a simple and obvious thing like hand washing - which protects incredibly well - is seen by many people as good health theory but not actually put into practice.”
Hugh Pennington, professor of microbiology at Aberdeen University, 2003
Do you practice good food hygiene?
It might seem that hidden dangers lurk in every mouthful of food!
But the fact that there could be a risk does not mean there actually is a danger.
Governments have set up strict checks and guidelines at every stage from the farm to your fork to make sure your food is safe to eat.
Different countries have different regulations and different authorities to enforce them, but they all have a very similar aim: to minimize the risk of any foodborne illness.
In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), together with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), cover every aspect of food safety.
In the UK food issues are regulated by the Food Standards Agency (FSA) together with other government departments such as the Department for the Environment, Farming and Rural Affairs (DEFRA).
It is the task of these agencies to decide whether or not to approve a new genetically modified food.
They oversee the testing and approval of chemical additives and new technologies.
They are responsible for inspecting food imported from countries where food regulations may be different.
Inspectors from these agencies also inspect premises to check on microbial contamination and any other food hazards.
Expert View “As a microbiologist, I set out to investigate how irradiation can not only kill harmful bacteria that cause food poisoning in humans but also how it can destroy spoilage bacteria and so offer longer shelf life to food products … Without a doubt, food irradiation is a real benefit for the consumer.
I often compare it to pasteurization - both prevent food spoilage while at the same time killing harmful bacteria.”
Margaret Patterson, food scientist at Queens University in Belfast, 2002
New technologies that could make our food even safer are tested and, when found to be beneficial, become standard within the food industry.
One technology makes use of ozone gas to react with certain chemicals inside microbes.
The reaction ruptures the cell walls of the microbes, killing them.
Other technologies include new anti-microbial washes and anti-bacterial sprays, improved testing techniques, and food irradiation.
However, some people remain concerned that irradiated food may not be safe.
When food is irradiated, chemicals called unique radiolytic products (URPs) are formed.
Some people think that these URPs may be harmful to humans.
The rules about food irradiation differ from one country to another: some countries allow many irradiated foods, while others restrict the process to a few food types.
 The strawberries on the left were irradiated after they were picked.
This killed any microbes on or in them, keeping them fresh longer.
The strawberries on the right were not irradiated and are clearly not fit to eat.
Food hygiene inspectors do regular inspections of all types of premises involved in the production of food, including farms, factories, slaughterhouses, stores, restaurants, and school kitchens.
An inspector needs to find out whether adequate hygiene standards are maintained, whether the food produced is safe to eat, and whether food poisoning or other injury might occur as a consequence of eating the food.
 A health inspector in France notes down his observations after an inspection of a freezer at a butcher’s shop.
Some of the things that an inspector looks at include • Management A manager should know about any hazards in his or her business and should have set up systems to ensure that those hazards do not result in the contamination of food.
Managers should also monitor every aspect of the business closel, and have written records to prove that they have done so. •
Staff training All staff should have had proper training for the job they are employed to do, such as food hygiene training.
Within the business, each member of staff should know exactly what his or her responsibilities are so that vital checks do not get overlooked. •
Temperature control Temperatures of fridges and freezers should be checked and recorded regularly, and foods such as meat should be checked to make sure they are thoroughly cooked. •
Cleanliness All surfaces and equipment should be clean. •
Avoiding cross-contamination Raw and cooked foods should be stored and prepared separately. •
Staff hygiene All staff should have high standards of personal hygiene and wear suitable clean clothing.
There should be adequate facilities for staff to wash their hands frequently and easily. •
Pests There should be no signs of any pests such as flies, mice, or cockroaches on the premises.
Expert View
These are extracts from genuine food hygiene inspectors’ reports: “During my inspection, I was informed joints of meat are cooled down for between six to seven hours within the kitchen before being placed within the fridge.
This practice is unsafe and must stop.” “
During my initial visit, dead cockroaches were found in traps in the kitchen.
Cockroach activity in a hospital kitchen in particular poses a risk to health and is not acceptable.”
Reported by Andrew Dagnell, Wales on Sunday, 2007
After an inspection, the inspector writes a report giving details of what he or she observed at the premises.
The manager of the premises is given a copy, and a copy is kept by the authorities.
The report may contain recommendations of action to be taken to improve a particular aspect of the business.
If this is the case, there will be a follow-up inspection to check that the recommendations have been carried out.
If an inspector finds something that is considered a danger to the public, the business can be closed immediately.
The information from scientific tests, safety checks and inspections is examined closely to decide whether any action needs to be taken.
For example, if scientific analysis of a product shows that it contains a prohibited substance, government agencies will ensure that the product is immediately withdrawn from sale to the public.
Alerts will be issued in newspapers and on radio and television to warn the public of the potential risk.
An investigation will be undertaken to discover how the problem occurred, and the company involved may be fined or prosecuted.
 Food inspectors test cooked hamburger meat in a fast-food restaurant.
Swift action is also taken if a number of people in one area all contract a foodborne illness at the same time.
Details are collected of the foods they have eaten and where the foods came from to try to find any common factors that may lead to the source of the outbreak.
A retailer or restaurant can be closed immediately if the outbreak is traced back to them.
Information about individual food items is provided on its packaging.
Food labeling gives a huge amount of information about what the food product contains, how it should be stored and cooked, and the date before which it should be eaten.
There are strict rules about this labeling.
For example, in the United States and the UK, a full list of ingredients must appear, together with an analysis of the food’s nutritional content.
Any ingredient that is known as a common cause of allergy, such as nuts, must be clearly labeled.
If the food contains GM products or has been irradiated, this must also be clearly indicated.
Storage instructions, durability, and cooking instructions must be shown.
The packaging must not contain anything untrue that might mislead the public.
Since much of our food is imported from other countries, food safety is no longer an issue that can be dealt with by individual countries working alone.
Instead, a more global approach is evolving, with countries sharing information and working together to improve food safety standards worldwide.
For example, the World Health Organization published Global Strategy for Food Safety in 2002 and set up the International Food Safety Authorities Network (INFOSAN) to improve international communication about food safety issues.
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations is involved in global food safety, and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) oversees issues within the European Union.
 A scientist examines a chicken egg at a research facility that advises the Belgian food safety agency.
FORUM
Are current measures sufficient to ensure our food is safe? “
The current inspection of food is antiquated and incapable of keeping up with the changes in the way food is produced, distributed, and consumed.
Food-borne illness seems to be on the rise, and new disease-causing microbes continue to appear.”
David A. Kessler, Food and Drug Administration commissioner, 2008 “WHO works closely with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to address food safety issues along the entire food production chain - from production to consumption - using new methods of risk analysis.
These methods provide efficient, science-based tools to improve food safety, thereby benefiting both public health and economic development.”
WHO website “Food Safety”
What do you think?
Newspapers, television, and radio frequently report news about food scares that make people anxious.
Issues about food safety are likely to continue to have a high profile in the media because it is a subject that concerns everyone.
But it should be remembered that the risk to the individual is often far lower than the headlines might suggest.
As the population of our planet increases, so does the demand for food.
This puts farmers under increasing pressure to produce higher yields from the land.
As countries develop and their economies grow, individuals become better off and their consumption of meat increases.
A meat-based diet requires much more land than a plant-based diet because animals do not convert plant material into edible meat efficiently: one person eating a plant-based diet needs about one-fifth the amount of food that livestock need to provide meat for one person for a year.
Global issues such as these will affect the types of food we eat and their production and so may ultimately affect the safety of our food.
 These people are waiting for food aid distribution in Maikona, Kenya.
Like many people in this region, they have lost most of their animals in a devastating drought and would face starvation without this aid.
The challenge for the future is how to end their dependence on the donated food.
The demand for organic food has increased steadily in recent years, and current indications are that this trend will continue.
It has been suggested, however, that avoiding the use of chemicals during production and processing may increase the risk of some foodborne microbial diseases.
Some organic farmers avoid using modern agrochemicals by reverting to traditional remedies, which may actually be more harmful to the consumer and the environment than the modern replacement.
Supporters of the organic food movement argue that these risks are small compared with those of non-organic food.
 This scientist is working to preserve the heritage and diversity of crops and vegetables and to improve their flavor, yield, and resistance to disease.
Some people suggest that GM foods hold the key to our future food needs.
Planting GM crops reduces pesticide and herbicide use while at the same time increasing crop yield and allowing cultivation of previously unsuitable land.
Others, though, warn of the potential dangers of the rapid expansion of a technology whose long-term effects cannot yet be known.
While GM food may provide solutions to future problems, it may also pose as yet unknown risks.
Some foods now have pictures of airplanes on the packaging to indicate that they have been transported by air.
Many people are concerned about the amount of produce being air-freighted around the world because of the resulting carbon dioxide emissions from aeroplanes.
The amount of food being flown into the UK, for example, doubled during the 1990s.
One solution is to try to buy more locally sourced food with fewer “food miles”.
Another possibility is for food imports to travel by other, less polluting ways, such as in cargo ships.
However, the increased journey times involved would require new methods of keeping the food fresh longer, which raises more issues about food safety.
Expert View “Recent trends in global food production, processing, distribution, and preparation are creating an increasing demand for food safety research in order to ensure a safer global food supply.”
WHO website “Food safety”
Scientists are continually searching for ways to make our food safer.
These are just some of the new technologies that are under investigation and that may soon appear in food production lines or on our supermarket shelves.
Genetic engineers have created a variety of tomato that produces HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) and HBV (hepatitis B virus) proteins.
When the tomatoes are eaten, the proteins stimulate an immune response in the same way as other oral vaccines, thus offering protection against infection.
It is possible that other medicines could be introduced into food in this way.
However, it could be difficult to control the amount of medicine an individual receives.
For more accurate dosage measurement, these foods may be grown and then made into tablets or capsules.
It can be difficult to tell whether fruit is ripe or not.
New stickers are being produced that detect ethylene, a gas given off by fruit as it ripens.
When the fruit is ripe, the sticker changes color.
This will make it easier to choose ripe fruit without squeezing and possibly damaging it.
FORUM
Will our food be safe in the future? “
The global community must keep its sights set on the goal of ensuring food security for all.
Condemning biotechnology for its potential risks without considering the alternative risks of prolonging the human misery caused by hunger, malnutrition, and child death is unwise and unethical.
In a world where the consequence of inaction is death of thousands of children, we must not ignore any part of a possible solution, including agricultural biotechnology.”
Per Pinstrup-Andersen, director general, International Food Policy Research Institute, 2001 “There have been many food and public health scandals in Europe over the past few years - mad cow disease in the UK, dioxins in Belgian chicken feed, tainted blood in France - and these have left a strong impression in the public’s mind, which is that politicians, scientists, doctors, and the food industry are not to be trusted.”
Conference report, International Conference Perspectives for Food 2030, Brussels, 2007
What do you think?
Nanotechnology is a relatively new and exciting branch of science that works at the level of individual molecules.
On this incredibly tiny scale, the often counterintuitive laws of quantum mechanics apply, so incorporating nanotechnology into a product gives it unexpected properties.
Some food-related nanotechnology products are already available, and others are being developed.
Nanotechnology seems about to affect food safety in many ways.
Products available already, although still undergoing further development, include • Nano-coated packaging to sense microbial and biochemical changes in the food.
On detecting a change, the packaging reacts either by changing color to warn the food is unsafe to eat or by releasing a chemical to make it safe. •
Kitchen utensils and containers coated with an anti-microbial nano coating that detects bacterial contamination and reacts to combat infection • nanoparticles on items such as cooking pots to increase properties such as heat conduction • nanoparticles embedded inside food to carry medicines or nutrients into the body without changing the taste of the food
Research is still being done on other products, including • In agriculture, nanosensors that can be distributed across fields to monitor soil conditions and crop growth and to automatically detect, locate, and report findings and apply water, fertilizers, and pesticides • Nano herbicides and pesticides that are more stable, more toxic to pests, and more easily absorbed by plants than existing chemicals