THE CITY AT THE BOTTOM OF THE SEA
Saturday, April ninth.
It was a calm and clear night.
The wild geese did not trouble themselves to seek shelter in any of the grottoes, but stood and slept upon the mountain top; and the boy had lain down in the short, dry grass beside the geese.
It was bright moonlight that night; so bright that it was difficult for the boy to go to sleep.
He lay there and thought about just how long he had been away from home; and he figured out that it was three weeks since he had started on the trip.
At the same time he remembered that this was Easter-eve.
"It is to-night that all the witches come home from Blakulla," thought he, and laughed to himself.
For he was just a little afraid of both the sea-nymph and the elf, but he didn't believe in witches the least little bit.
If there had been any witches out that night, he should have seen them, to be sure.
It was so light in the heavens that not the tiniest black speck could move in the air without his seeing it.
While the boy lay there with his nose in the air and thought about this, his eye rested on something lovely! The moon's disc was whole and round, and rather high, and over it a big bird came flying.
He did not fly past the moon, but he moved just as though he might have flown out from it.
The bird looked black against the light background, and the wings extended from one rim of the disc to the other.
He flew on, evenly, in the same direction, and the boy thought that he was painted on the moon's disc.
The body was small, the neck long and slender, the legs hung down, long and thin.
It couldn't be anything but a stork.
A couple of seconds later Herr Ermenrich, the stork, lit beside the boy.
He bent down and poked him with his bill to awaken him.
Instantly the boy sat up.
"I'm not asleep, Herr Ermenrich," he said.
"How does it happen that you are out in the middle of the night, and how is everything at Glimminge castle?
Do you want to speak with mother Akka?"
"It's too light to sleep to-night," answered Herr Ermenrich. "Therefore I concluded to travel over here to Karl's Island and hunt you up, friend Thumbietot. I learned from the seamew that you were spending the night here.
I have not as yet moved over to Glimminge castle, but am still living at Pommern."
The boy was simply overjoyed to think that Herr Ermenrich had sought him out.
They chatted about all sorts of things, like old friends.
At last the stork asked the boy if he wouldn't like to go out riding for a while on this beautiful night.
Oh, yes!
that the boy wanted to do, if the stork would manage it so that he got back to the wild geese before sunrise.
This he promised, so off they went.
Again Herr Ermenrich flew straight toward the moon.
They rose and rose; the sea sank deep down, but the flight went so light and easy that it seemed almost as if the boy lay still in the air.
When Herr Ermenrich began to descend, the boy thought that the flight had lasted an unreasonably short time.
They landed on a desolate bit of seashore, which was covered with fine, even sand.
All along the coast ran a row of flying-sand drifts, with lyme-grass on their tops.
They were not very high, but they prevented the boy from seeing any of the island.
Herr Ermenrich stood on a sand-hill, drew up one leg and bent his head backward, so he could stick his bill under the wing. "You can roam around on the shore for a while," he said to Thumbietot, "while I rest myself.
But don't go so far away but what you can find your way back to me again!"
To start with, the boy intended to climb a sand-hill and see how the land behind it looked. But when he had walked a couple of paces, he stubbed the toe of his wooden shoe against something hard.
He stooped down, and saw that a small copper coin lay on the sand, and was so worn with verdigris that it was almost transparent.
It was so poor that he didn't even bother to pick it up, but only kicked it out of the way.
But when he straightened himself up once more he was perfectly astounded, for two paces away from him stood a high, dark wall with a big, turreted gate.
The moment before, when the boy bent down, the sea lay there - shimmering and smooth, while now it was hidden by a long wall with towers and battlements.
Directly in front of him, where before there had been only a few sea-weed banks, the big gate of the wall opened.
The boy probably understood that it was a spectre-play of some sort; but this was nothing to be afraid of, thought he. It wasn't any dangerous trolls, or any other evil - such as he always dreaded to encounter at night.
Both the wall and the gate were so beautifully constructed that he only desired to see what there might be back of them. "
I must find out what this can be," thought he, and went in through the gate.
In the deep archway there were guards, dressed in brocaded and purred suits, with long-handled spears beside them, who sat and threw dice.
They thought only of the game, and took no notice of the boy who hurried past them quickly.
Just within the gate he found an open space, paved with large, even stone blocks. All around this were high and magnificent buildings; and between these opened long, narrow streets. On the square - facing the gate - it fairly swarmed with human beings.
The men wore long, fur-trimmed capes over satin suits; plume-bedecked hats sat obliquely on their heads; on their chests hung superb chains.
They were all so regally gotten up that the whole lot of them might have been kings.
The women went about in high head-dresses and long robes with tight-fitting sleeves.
They, too, were beautifully dressed, but their splendour was not to be compared with that of the men.
This was exactly like the old story-book which mother took from the chest - only once - and showed to him.
The boy simply couldn't believe his eyes.
But that which was even more wonderful to look upon than either the men or the women, was the city itself. Every house was built in such a way that a gable faced the street.
And the gables were so highly ornamented, that one could believe they wished to compete with each other as to which one could show the most beautiful decorations.
When one suddenly sees so much that is new, he cannot manage to treasure it all in his memory.
But at least the boy could recall that he had seen stairway gables on the various landings, which bore images of the Christ and his Apostles; gables, where there were images in niche after niche all along the wall; gables that were inlaid with multi-coloured bits of glass, and gables that were striped and checked with white and black marble.
As the boy admired all this, a sudden sense of haste came over him. "
Anything like this my eyes have never seen before.
Anything like this, they would never see again," he said to himself.
And he began to run in toward the city - up one street, and down another.
The streets were straight and narrow, but not empty and gloomy, as they were in the cities with which he was familiar. There were people everywhere. Old women sat by their open doors and spun without a spinning-wheel - only with the help of a shuttle.
The merchants' shops were like market-stalls - opening on the street.
All the hand-workers did their work out of doors.
In one place they were boiling crude oil; in another tanning hides; in a third there was a long rope-walk.
If only the boy had had time enough he could have learned how to make all sorts of things.
Here he saw how armourers hammered out thin breast-plates; how turners tended their irons; how the shoemakers soled soft, red shoes; how the gold-wire drawers twisted gold thread, and how the weavers inserted silver and gold into their weaving.
But the boy did not have the time to stay.
He just rushed on, so that he could manage to see as much as possible before it would all vanish again.
The high wall ran all around the city and shut it in, as a hedge shuts in a field. He saw it at the end of every street - gable-ornamented and crenelated.
On the top of the wall walked warriors in shining armour; and when he had run from one end of the city to the other, he came to still another gate in the wall.
Outside of this lay the sea and harbour.
The boy saw olden-time ships, with rowing-benches straight across, and high structures fore and aft.
Some lay and took on cargo, others were just casting anchor.
Carriers and merchants hurried around each other.
All over, it was life and bustle.
But not even here did he seem to have the time to linger. He rushed into the city again; and now he came up to the big square. There stood the cathedral with its three high towers and deep vaulted arches filled with images.
The walls had been so highly decorated by sculptors that there was not a stone without its own special ornamentation.
And what a magnificent display of gilded crosses and gold-trimmed altars and priests in golden vestments, shimmered through the open gate!
Directly opposite the church there was a house with a notched roof and a single slender, sky-high tower.
That was probably the courthouse.
And between the courthouse and the cathedral, all around the square, stood the beautiful gabled houses with their multiplicity of adornments.
The boy had run himself both warm and tired. He thought that now he had seen the most remarkable things, and therefore he began to walk more leisurely. The street which he had turned into now was surely the one where the inhabitants purchased their fine clothing.
He saw crowds of people standing before the little stalls where the merchants spread brocades, stiff satins, heavy gold cloth, shimmery velvet, delicate veiling, and laces as sheer as a spider's web.
Before, when the boy ran so fast, no one had paid any attention to him. The people must have thought that it was only a little gray rat that darted by them.
But now, when he walked down the street, very slowly, one of the salesmen caught sight of him, and began to beckon to him.
At first the boy was uneasy and wanted to hurry out of the way, but the salesman only beckoned and smiled, and spread out on the counter a lovely piece of satin damask as if he wanted to tempt him.
The boy shook his head.
"I will never be so rich that I can buy even a metre of that cloth," thought he.
But now they had caught sight of him in every stall, all along the street. Wherever he looked stood a salesman and beckoned to him. They left their costly wares, and thought only of him.
He saw how they hurried into the most hidden corner of the stall to fetch the best that they had to sell, and how their hands trembled with eagerness and haste as they laid it upon the counter.
When the boy continued to go on, one of the merchants jumped over the counter, caught hold of him, and spread before him silver cloth and woven tapestries, which shone with brilliant colours.
The boy couldn't do anything but laugh at him.
The salesman certainly must understand that a poor little creature like him couldn't buy such things.
He stood still and held out his two empty hands, so they would understand that he had nothing and let him go in peace.
But the merchant raised a finger and nodded and pushed the whole pile of beautiful things over to him.
"Can he mean that he will sell all this for a gold piece?"
wondered the boy.
The merchant brought out a tiny worn and poor coin - the smallest that one could see - and showed it to him.
And he was so eager to sell that he increased his pile with a pair of large, heavy, silver goblets.
Then the boy began to dig down in his pockets.
He knew, of course, that he didn't possess a single coin, but he couldn't help feeling for it.
All the other merchants stood still and tried to see how the sale would come off, and when they observed that the boy began to search in his pockets, they flung themselves over the counters, filled their hands full of gold and silver ornaments, and offered them to him.
And they all showed him that what they asked in payment was just one little penny.
But the boy turned both vest and breeches pockets inside out, so they should see that he owned nothing. Then tears filled the eyes of all these regal merchants, who were so much richer than he.
At last he was moved because they looked so distressed, and he pondered if he could not in some way help them.
And then he happened to think of the rusty coin, which he had but lately seen on the strand.
He started to run down the street, and luck was with him so that he came to the self-same gate which he had happened upon first.
He dashed through it, and commenced to search for the little green copper penny which lay on the strand a while ago.
He found it too, very promptly; but when he had picked it up, and wanted to run back to the city with it - he saw only the sea before him.
No city wall, no gate, no sentinels, no streets, no houses could now be seen - only the sea.
The boy couldn't help that the tears came to his eyes. He had believed in the beginning, that that which he saw was nothing but an hallucination, but this he had already forgotten. He only thought about how pretty everything was.
He felt a genuine, deep sorrow because the city had vanished.
That moment Herr Ermenrich awoke, and came up to him.
But he didn't hear him, and the stork had to poke the boy with his bill to attract attention to himself.
"I believe that you stand here and sleep just as I do," said Herr Ermenrich.
"Oh, Herr Ermenrich!"
said the boy.
"What was that city which stood here just now?"
"Have you seen a city?"
said the stork.
"You have slept and dreamt, as I say."
"No!
I have not dreamt," said Thumbietot, and he told the stork all that he had experienced.
Then Herr Ermenrich said: "For my part, Thumbietot, I believe that you fell asleep here on the strand and dreamed all this.
"But I will not conceal from you that Bataki, the raven, who is the most learned of all birds, once told me that in former times there was a city on this shore, called Vineta.
It was so rich and so fortunate, that no city has ever been more glorious; but its inhabitants, unluckily, gave themselves up to arrogance and love of display.
As a punishment for this, says Bataki, the city of Vineta was overtaken by a flood, and sank into the sea.
But its inhabitants cannot die, neither is their city destroyed.
And one night in every hundred years, it rises in all its splendour up from the sea, and remains on the surface just one hour."
"Yes, it must be so," said Thumbietot, "for this I have seen."
"But when the hour is up, it sinks again into the sea, if, during that time, no merchant in Vineta has sold anything to a single living creature.
If you, Thumbietot, only had had an ever so tiny coin, to pay the merchants, Vineta might have remained up here on the shore; and its people could have lived and died like other human beings."
"Herr Ermenrich," said the boy, "now I understand why you came and fetched me in the middle of the night.
It was because you believed that I should be able to save the old city.
I am so sorry it didn't turn out as you wished, Herr Ermenrich."
He covered his face with his hands and wept.
It wasn't easy to say which one looked the more disconsolate - the boy, or Herr Ermenrich.
THE LIVING CITY
Monday, April eleventh.
On the afternoon of Easter Monday, the wild geese and Thumbietot were on the wing.
They travelled over Gottland.
The large island lay smooth and even beneath them. The ground was checked just as it was in Skåne and there were many churches and farms.
But there was this difference, however, that there were more leafy meadows between the fields here, and then the farms were not built up with small houses.
And there were no large manors with ancient tower-ornamented castles.
The wild geese had taken the route over Gottland on account of Thumbietot. He had been altogether unlike himself for two days, and hadn't spoken a cheerful word. This was because he had thought of nothing but that city which had appeared to him in such a strange way.
He had never seen anything so magnificent and royal, and he could not be reconciled with himself for having failed to save it.
Usually he was not chicken-hearted, but now he actually grieved for the beautiful buildings and the stately people.
Both Akka and the goosey-gander tried to convince Thumbietot that he had been the victim of a dream, or an hallucination, but the boy wouldn't listen to anything of that sort.
He was so positive that he had really seen what he had seen, that no one could move him from this conviction.
He went about so disconsolate that his travelling companions became uneasy for him.
Just as the boy was the most depressed, old Kaksi came back to the flock. She had been blown toward Gottland, and had been compelled to travel over the whole island before she had learned through some crows that her comrades were on Little Karl's Island.
When Kaksi found out what was wrong with Thumbietot, she said impulsively:
"If Thumbietot is grieving over an old city, we'll soon be able to comfort him.
Just come along, and I'll take you to a place that I saw yesterday!
You will not need to be distressed very long."
Thereupon the geese had taken farewell of the sheep, and were on their way to the place which Kaksi wished to show Thumbietot.
As blue as he was, he couldn't keep from looking at the land over which he travelled, as usual.
He thought it looked as though the whole island had in the beginning been just such a high, steep cliff as Karl's Island - though much bigger of course. But afterward, it had in some way been flattened out.
Someone had taken a big rolling-pin and rolled over it, as if it had been a lump of dough.
Not that the island had become altogether flat and even, like a bread-cake, for it wasn't like that.
While they had travelled along the coast, he had seen white lime walls with grottoes and crags, in several directions; but in most of the places they were levelled, and sank inconspicuously down toward the sea.
In Gottland they had a pleasant and peaceful holiday afternoon.
It turned out to be mild spring weather; the trees had large buds; spring blossoms dressed the ground in the leafy meadows; the poplars' long, thin pendants swayed; and in the little gardens, which one finds around every cottage, the gooseberry bushes were green.
The warmth and the spring-budding had tempted the people out into the gardens and roads, and wherever a number of them were gathered together they were playing.
It was not the children alone who played, but the grown-ups also.
They were throwing stones at a given point, and they threw balls in the air with such exact aim that they almost touched the wild geese.
It looked cheerful and pleasant to see big folks at play; and the boy certainly would have enjoyed it, if he had been able to forget his grief because he had failed to save the city.
Anyway, he had to admit that this was a lovely trip. There was so much singing and sound in the air. Little children played ring games, and sang as they played. The Salvation Army was out.
He saw a lot of people dressed in black and red - sitting upon a wooded hill, playing on guitars and brass instruments.
On one road came a great crowd of people.
They were Good Templars who had been on a pleasure trip.
He recognized them by the big banners with the gold inscriptions which waved above them.
They sang song after song as long as he could hear them.
After that the boy could never think of Gottland without thinking of the games and songs at the same time.
He had been sitting and looking down for a long while; but now he happened to raise his eyes. No one can describe his amazement. Before he was aware of it, the wild geese had left the interior of the island and gone westward - toward the sea-coast.
Now the wide, blue sea lay before him.
However, it was not the sea that was remarkable, but a city which appeared on the sea-shore.
The boy came from the east, and the sun had just begun to go down in the west. When he came nearer the city, its walls and towers and high, gabled houses and churches stood there, perfectly black, against the light evening sky.
He couldn't see therefore what it really looked like, and for a couple of moments he believed that this city was just as beautiful as the one he had seen on Easter night.
When he got right up to it, he saw that it was both like and unlike that city from the bottom of the sea.
There was the same contrast between them, as there is between a man whom one sees arrayed in purple and jewels one day, and on another day one sees him dressed in rags.
Yes, this city had probably, once upon a time, been like the one which he sat and thought about. This one, also, was enclosed by a wall with towers and gates. But the towers in this city, which had been allowed to remain on land, were roofless, hollow and empty.
The gates were without doors; sentinels and warriors had disappeared.
All the glittering splendour was gone.
There was nothing left but the naked, gray stone skeleton.
When the boy came farther into the city, he saw that the larger part of it was made up of small, low houses; but here and there were still a few high gabled houses and a few cathedrals, which were from the olden time.
The walls of the gabled houses were whitewashed, and entirely without ornamentation; but because the boy had so lately seen the buried city, he seemed to understand how they had been decorated: some with statues, and others with black and white marble.
And it was the same with the old cathedrals; the majority of them were roofless with bare interiors.
The window openings were empty, the floors were grass-grown, and ivy clambered along the walls.
But now he knew how they had looked at one time; that they had been covered with images and paintings; that the chancel had had trimmed altars and gilded crosses, and that their priests had moved about, arrayed in gold vestments.
The boy saw also the narrow streets, which were almost deserted on holiday afternoons.
He knew, he did, what a stream of stately people had once upon a time sauntered about on them.
He knew that they had been like large workshops - filled with all sorts of workmen.
But that which Nils Holgersson did not see was, that the city - even to-day - was both beautiful and remarkable.
He saw neither the cheery cottages on the side streets, with their black walls, and white bows and red pelargoniums behind the shining window-panes, nor the many pretty gardens and avenues, nor the beauty in the weed-clad ruins.
His eyes were so filled with the preceding glory, that he could not see anything good in the present.
The wild geese flew back and forth over the city a couple of times, so that Thumbietot might see everything.
Finally they sank down on the grass-grown floor of a cathedral ruin to spend the night.
When they had arranged themselves for sleep, Thumbietot was still awake and looked up through the open arches, to the pale pink evening sky.
When he had been sitting there a while, he thought he didn't want to grieve any more because he couldn't save the buried city.
No, that he didn't want to do, now that he had seen this one. If that city, which he had seen, had not sunk into the sea again, then it would perhaps become as dilapidated as this one in a little while.
Perhaps it could not have withstood time and decay, but would have stood there with roofless churches and bare houses and desolate, empty streets - just like this one.
Then it was better that it should remain in all its glory down in the deep.
"It was best that it happened as it happened," thought he.
"If I had the power to save the city, I don't believe that I should care to do it."
Then he no longer grieved over that matter.
And there are probably many among the young who think in the same way.
But when people are old, and have become accustomed to being satisfied with little, then they are more happy over the Visby that exists, than over a magnificent Vineta at the bottom of the sea.
Tuesday, April twelfth.
The wild geese had made a good trip over the sea, and had lighted in Tjust Township, in northern Småland. That township didn't seem able to make up its mind whether it wanted to be land or sea.
Fiords ran in everywhere, and cut the land up into islands and peninsulas and points and capes.
The sea was so forceful that the only things which could hold themselves above it were hills and mountains.
All the lowlands were hidden away under the water exterior.
It was evening when the wild geese came in from the sea; and the land with the little hills lay prettily between the shimmering fiords.
Here and there, on the islands, the boy saw cabins and cottages; and the farther inland he came, the bigger and better became the dwelling houses.
Finally, they grew into large, white manors.
Along the shores there was generally a border of trees; and within this lay field-plots, and on the tops of the little hills there were trees again.
He could not help but think of Blekinge.
Here again was a place where land and sea met, in such a pretty and peaceful sort of way, just as if they tried to show each other the best and loveliest which they possessed.
The wild geese alighted upon a limestone island a good way in on Goose-fiord. With the first glance at the shore they observed that spring had made rapid strides while they had been away on the islands.
The big, fine trees were not as yet leaf-clad, but the ground under them was brocaded with white anemones, gagea, and blue anemones.
When the wild geese saw the flower-carpet they feared that they had lingered too long in the southern part of the country. Akka said instantly that there was no time in which to hunt up any of the stopping places in Småland.
By the next morning they must travel northward, over Östergötland.
The boy should then see nothing of Småland, and this grieved him.
He had heard more about Småland than he had about any other province, and he had longed to see it with his own eyes.
The summer before, when he had served as goose-boy with a farmer in the neighbourhood of Jordberga, he had met a pair of Småland children, almost every day, who also tended geese.
These children had irritated him terribly with their Småland.
It wasn't fair to say that Osa, the goose-girl, had annoyed him.
She was much too wise for that.
But the one who could be aggravating with a vengeance was her brother, little Mats.
"Have you heard, Nils Goose-boy, how it went when Småland and Skåne were created?"
he would ask, and if Nils Holgersson said no, he began immediately to relate the old joke-legend.
"Well, it was at that time when our Lord was creating the world. While he was doing his best work, Saint Peter came walking by. He stopped and looked on, and then he asked if it was hard to do. 'Well, it isn't exactly easy,' said our Lord.
Saint Peter stood there a little longer, and when he noticed how easy it was to lay out one landscape after another, he too wanted to try his hand at it.
'Perhaps you need to rest yourself a little,' said Saint Peter, 'I could attend to the work in the meantime for you.'
But this our Lord did not wish.
'I do not know if you are so much at home in this art that I can trust you to take hold where I leave off,' he answered.
Then Saint Peter was angry, and said that he believed he could create just as fine countries as our Lord himself.
"It happened that our Lord was just then creating Småland. It wasn't even half-ready but it looked as though it would be an indescribably pretty and fertile land.
It was difficult for our Lord to say no to Saint Peter, and aside from this, he thought very likely that a thing so well begun no one could spoil.
Therefore he said: If you like, we will prove which one of us two understands this sort of work the better.
You, who are only a novice, shall go on with this which I have begun, and I will create a new land.'
To this Saint Peter agreed at once; and so they went to work - each one in his place.
"Our Lord moved southward a bit, and there he undertook to create Skåne. It wasn't long before he was through with it, and soon he asked if Saint Peter had finished, and would come and look at his work.
'I had mine ready long ago,' said Saint Peter; and from the sound of his voice it could be heard how pleased he was with what he had accomplished.
"When Saint Peter saw Skåne, he had to acknowledge that there was nothing but good to be said of that land. It was a fertile land and easy to cultivate, with wide plains wherever one looked, and hardly a sign of hills.
It was evident that our Lord had really contemplated making it such that people should feel at home there. '
Yes, this is a good country,' said Saint Peter, 'but I think that mine is better.' '
Then we'll take a look at it,' said our Lord.
"The land was already finished in the north and east when Saint Peter began the work, but the southern and western parts; and the whole interior, he had created all by himself.
Now when our Lord came up there, where Saint Peter had been at work, he was so horrified that he stopped short and exclaimed: 'What on earth have you been doing with this land, Saint Peter?'
"Saint Peter, too, stood and looked around - perfectly astonished.
He had had the idea that nothing could be so good for a land as a great deal of warmth.
Therefore he had gathered together an enormous mass of stones and mountains, and erected a highland, and this he had done so that it should be near the sun, and receive much help from the sun's heat.
Over the stone-heaps he had spread a thin layer of soil, and then he had thought that everything was well arranged.
"But while he was down in Skåne, a couple of heavy showers had come up, and more was not needed to show what his work amounted to.
When our Lord came to inspect the land, all the soil had been washed away, and the naked mountain foundation shone forth all over.
Where it was about the best, lay clay and heavy gravel over the rocks, but it looked so poor that it was easy to understand that hardly anything except spruce and juniper and moss and heather could grow there.
But what there was plenty of was water.
It had filled up all the clefts in the mountain; and lakes and rivers and brooks; these one saw everywhere, to say nothing of swamps and morasses, which spread over large tracts.
And the most exasperating thing of all was, that while some tracts had too much water, it was so scarce in others, that whole fields lay like dry moors, where sand and earth whirled up in clouds with the least little breeze.
"'What can have been your meaning in creating such a land as this?' said our Lord. Saint Peter made excuses, and declared he had wished to build up a land so high that it should have plenty of warmth from the sun.
'But then you will also get much of the night chill,' said our Lord, 'for that too comes from heaven.
I am very much afraid the little that can grow here will freeze.'
"This, to be sure, Saint Peter hadn't thought about.
"'Yes, here it will be a poor and frost-bound land,' said our Lord, 'it can't be helped.'"
When little Mats had gotten this far in his story, Osa, the goose-girl, protested: "I cannot bear, little Mats, to hear you say that it is so miserable in Småland," said she. "You forget entirely how much good soil there is there. Only think of Möre district, by Kalmar Sound!
I wonder where you'll find a richer grain region.
There are fields upon fields, just like here in Skåne.
The soil is so good that I cannot imagine anything that couldn't grow there."
"I can't help that," said little Mats.
"I'm only relating what others have said before."
"And I have heard many say that there is not a more beautiful coast land than Tjust. Think of the bays and islets, and the manors, and the groves!" said Osa. "Yes, that's true enough," little Mats admitted.
"And don't you remember," continued Osa, "the school teacher said that such a lively and picturesque district as that bit of Småland which lies south of Lake Vettern is not to be found in all Sweden?
Think of the beautiful sea and the yellow coast-mountains, and of Grenna and Jönköping, with its match factory, and think of Huskvarna, and all the big establishments there!" "
Yes, that's true enough," said little Mats once again.
"And think of Visingsö, little Mats, with the ruins and the oak forests and the legends!
Think of the valley through which Emån flows, with all the villages and flour-mills and sawmills, and the carpenter shops!" "
Yes, that is true enough," said little Mats, and looked troubled.
All of a sudden he had looked up. "Now we are pretty stupid," said he. "All this, of course, lies in our Lord's Småland, in that part of the land which was already finished when Saint Peter undertook the job.
It's only natural that it should be pretty and fine there.
But in Saint Peter's Småland it looks as it says in the legend.
And it wasn't surprising that our Lord was distressed when he saw it," continued little Mats, as he took up the thread of his story again.
"Saint Peter didn't lose his courage, at all events, but tried to comfort our Lord. '
Don't be so grieved over this!'
said he. '
Only wait until I have created people who can till the swamps and break up fields from the stone hills.'
"That was the end of our Lord's patience - and he said: 'No! you can go down to Skåne and make the Skåninge, but the Smålander I will create myself.'
And so our Lord created the Smålander, and made him quick-witted and contented and happy and thrifty and enterprising and capable, that he might be able to get his livelihood in his poor country."
Then little Mats was silent; and if Nils Holgersson had also kept still, all would have gone well; but he couldn't possibly refrain from asking how Saint Peter had succeeded in creating the Skåninge.
"Well, what do you think yourself?" said little Mats, and looked so scornful that Nils Holgersson threw himself upon him, to thrash him. But Mats was only a little tot, and Osa, the goose-girl, who was a year older than he, ran forward instantly to help him.
Good-natured though she was, she sprang like a lion as soon as anyone touched her brother.
And Nils Holgersson did not care to fight a girl, but turned his back, and didn't look at those Småland children for the rest of the day.
THE EARTHEN CROCK
In the southwest corner of Småland lies a township called Sonnerbo. It is a rather smooth and even country.
And one who sees it in winter, when it is covered with snow, cannot imagine that there is anything under the snow but garden-plots, rye-fields and clover-meadows as is generally the case in flat countries.
But, in the beginning of April when the snow finally melts away in Sonnerbo, it is apparent that that which lies hidden under it is only dry, sandy heaths, bare rocks, and big, marshy swamps.
There are fields here and there, to be sure, but they are so small that they are scarcely worth mentioning; and one also finds a few little red or gray farmhouses hidden away in some beech-coppice - almost as if they were afraid to show themselves.
Where Sonnerbo township touches the boundaries of Halland, there is a sandy heath which is so far-reaching that he who stands upon one edge of it cannot look across to the other.
Nothing except heather grows on the heath, and it wouldn't be easy either to coax other growths to thrive there.
To start with one would have to uproot the heather; for it is thus with heather: although it has only a little shrunken root, small shrunken branches, and dry, shrunken leaves it fancies that it's a tree.
Therefore it acts just like real trees - spreads itself out in forest fashion over wide areas; holds together faithfully, and causes all foreign growths that wish to crowd in upon its territory to die out.
The only place on the heath where the heather is not all-powerful, is a low, stony ridge which passes over it. There you'll find juniper bushes, mountain ash, and a few large, fine oaks.
At the time when Nils Holgersson travelled around with the wild geese, a little cabin stood there, with a bit of cleared ground around it.
But the people who had lived there at one time, had, for some reason or other, moved away.
The little cabin was empty, and the ground lay unused.
When the tenants left the cabin they closed the damper, fastened the window-hooks, and locked the door. But no one had thought of the broken window-pane which was only stuffed with a rag.
After the showers of a couple of summers, the rag had moulded and shrunk, and, finally, a crow had succeeded in poking it out.
The ridge on the heather-heath was really not as desolate as one might think, for it was inhabited by a large crow-folk. Naturally, the crows did not live there all the year round.
They moved to foreign lands in the winter; in the autumn they travelled from one grain-field to another all over Götaland, and picked grain; during the summer, they spread themselves over the farms in Sonnerbo township, and lived upon eggs and berries and birdlings; but every spring, when nesting time came, they came back to the heather-heath.
The one who had poked the rag from the window was a crow-cock named Garm Whitefeather; but he was never called anything but Fumle or Drumle, or out and out Fumle-Drumle, because he always acted awkwardly and stupidly, and wasn't good for anything except to make fun of.
Fumle-Drumle was bigger and stronger than any of the other crows, but that didn't help him in the least; he was - and remained - a butt for ridicule.
And it didn't profit him, either, that he came from very good stock.
If everything had gone smoothly, he should have been leader for the whole flock, because this honour had, from time immemorial, belonged to the oldest Whitefeather.
But long before Fumle-Drumle was born, the power had gone from his family, and was now wielded by a cruel wild crow, named Wind-Rush.
This transference of power was due to the fact that the crows on crow-ridge desired to change their manner of living. Possibly there are many who think that everything in the shape of crow lives in the same way; but this is not so.
There are entire crow-folk who lead honourable lives - that is to say, they only eat grain, worms, caterpillars, and dead animals; and there are others who lead a regular bandit's life, who throw themselves upon baby-hares and small birds, and plunder every single bird's nest they set eyes on.
The ancient Whitefeathers had been strict and temperate; and as long as they had led the flock, the crows had been compelled to conduct themselves in such a way that other birds could speak no ill of them. But the crows were numerous, and poverty was great among them.
They didn't care to go the whole length of living a strictly moral life, so they rebelled against the Whitefeathers, and gave the power to Wind-Rush, who was the worst nest-plunderer and robber that could be imagined - if his wife, Wind-Air, wasn't worse still.
Under their government the crows had begun to lead such a life that now they were more feared than pigeon-hawks and leech-owls.
Naturally, Fumle-Drumle had nothing to say in the flock. The crows were all of the opinion that he did not in the least take after his forefathers, and that he wouldn't suit as a leader. No one would have mentioned him, if he hadn't constantly committed fresh blunders.
A few, who were quite sensible, sometimes said perhaps it was lucky for Fumle-Drumle that he was such a bungling idiot, otherwise Wind-Rush and Wind-Air would hardly have allowed him - who was of the old chieftain stock - to remain with the flock.
Now, on the other hand, they were rather friendly toward him, and willingly took him along with them on their hunting expeditions.
There all could observe how much more skilful and daring they were than he.
None of the crows knew that it was Fumle-Drumle who had pecked the rag out of the window; and had they known of this, they would have been very much astonished. Such a thing as daring to approach a human being's dwelling, they had never believed of him.
He kept the thing to himself very carefully; and he had his own good reasons for it.
Wind-Rush always treated him well in the daytime, and when the others were around; but one very dark night, when the comrades sat on the night branch, he was attacked by a couple of crows and nearly murdered.
After that he moved every night, after dark, from his usual sleeping quarters into the empty cabin.
Now one afternoon, when the crows had put their nests in order on crow-ridge, they happened upon a remarkable find. Wind-Rush, Fumle-Drumle, and a couple of others had flown down into a big hollow in one corner of the heath.
The hollow was nothing but a gravel-pit, but the crows could not be satisfied with such a simple explanation; they flew down in it continually, and turned every single sand-grain to get at the reason why human beings had digged it.
While the crows were pottering around down there, a mass of gravel fell from one side.
They rushed up to it, and had the good fortune to find amongst the fallen stones and stubble - a large earthen crock, which was locked with a wooden clasp!
Naturally they wanted to know if there was anything in it, and they tried both to peck holes in the crock, and to bend up the clasp, but they had no success.
They stood perfectly helpless and examined the crock, when they heard someone say: "Shall I come down and assist you crows?" They glanced up quickly. On the edge of the hollow sat a fox and blinked down at them.
He was one of the prettiest foxes - both in colour and form - that they had ever seen.
The only fault with him was that he had lost an ear.
"If you desire to do us a service," said Wind-Rush, "we shall not say nay." At the same time, both he and the others flew up from the hollow.
Then the fox jumped down in their place, bit at the jar, and pulled at the lock - but he couldn't open it either.
"Can you make out what there is in it?"
said Wind-Rush.
The fox rolled the jar back and forth, and listened attentively.
"It must be silver money," said he.
This was more than the crows had expected.
"Do you think it can be silver?"
said they, and their eyes were ready to pop out of their heads with greed; for remarkable as it may sound, there is nothing in the world which crows love as much as silver money.
"Hear how it rattles!" said the fox and rolled the crock around once more. "Only I can't understand how we shall get at it." "That will surely be impossible," said the crows. The fox stood and rubbed his head against his left leg, and pondered.
Now perhaps he might succeed, with the help of the crows, in becoming master of that little imp who always eluded him. "
Oh!
I know someone who could open the crock for you," said the fox. "
Then tell us!
Tell us!"
cried the crows; and they were so excited that they tumbled down into the pit. "
That I will do, if you'll first promise me that you will agree to my terms," said he.
Then the fox told the crows about Thumbietot, and said that if they could bring him to the heath he would open the crock for them.
But in payment for this counsel, he demanded that they should deliver Thumbietot to him, as soon as he had gotten the silver money for them.
The crows had no reason to spare Thumbietot, so agreed to the compact at once.
It was easy enough to agree to this; but it was harder to find out where Thumbietot and the wild geese were stopping.
Wind-Rush himself travelled away with fifty crows, and said that he should soon return.
But one day after another passed without the crows on crow-ridge seeing a shadow of him.
KIDNAPPED BY CROWS
Wednesday, April thirteenth.
The wild geese were up at daybreak, so they should have time to get themselves a bite of food before starting out on the journey toward Östergötland.
The island in Goosefiord, where they had slept, was small and barren, but in the water all around it were growths which they could eat their fill upon.
It was worse for the boy, however.
He couldn't manage to find anything eatable.
As he stood there hungry and drowsy, and looked around in all directions, his glance fell upon a pair of squirrels, who played upon the wooded point, directly opposite the rock island.
He wondered if the squirrels still had any of their winter supplies left, and asked the white goosey-gander to take him over to the point, that he might beg them for a couple of hazelnuts.
Instantly the white one swam across the sound with him; but as luck would have it the squirrels had so much fun chasing each other from tree to tree, that they didn't bother about listening to the boy. They drew farther into the grove.
He hurried after them, and was soon out of the goosey-gander's sight - who stayed behind and waited on the shore.
The boy waded forward between some white anemone-stems - which were so high they reached to his chin - when he felt that someone caught hold of him from behind, and tried to lift him up. He turned round and saw that a crow had grabbed him by the shirt-band.
He tried to break loose, but before this was possible, another crow ran up, gripped him by the stocking, and knocked him over.
If Nils Holgersson had immediately cried for help, the white goosey-gander certainly would have been able to save him; but the boy probably thought that he could protect himself, unaided, against a couple of crows.
He kicked and struck out, but the crows didn't let go their hold, and they soon succeeded in raising themselves into the air with him.
To make matters worse, they flew so recklessly that his head struck against a branch.
He received a hard knock over the head, it grew black before his eyes, and he lost consciousness.
When he opened his eyes once more, he found himself high above the ground. He regained his senses slowly; at first he knew neither where he was, nor what he saw.
When he glanced down, he saw that under him was spread a tremendously big woolly carpet, which was woven in greens and reds, and in large irregular patterns.
The carpet was very thick and fine, but he thought it was a pity that it had been so badly used.
It was actually ragged; long tears ran through it; in some places large pieces were torn away.
And the strangest of all was that it appeared to be spread over a mirror floor; for under the holes and tears in the carpet shone bright and glittering glass.
The next thing the boy observed was that the sun unrolled itself in the heavens. Instantly, the mirror-glass under the holes and tears in the carpet began to shimmer in red and gold.
It looked very gorgeous, and the boy was delighted with the pretty colour-scheme, although he didn't exactly understand what it was that he saw.
But now the crows descended, and he saw at once that the big carpet under him was the earth, which was dressed in green and brown cone-trees and naked leaf-trees, and that the holes and tears were shining fiords and little lakes.
He remembered that the first time he had travelled up in the air, he had thought that the earth in Skåne looked like a piece of checked cloth.
But this country which resembled a torn carpet - what might this be?
He began to ask himself a lot of questions.
Why wasn't he sitting on the goosey-gander's back?
Why did a great swarm of crows fly around him?
And why was he being pulled and knocked hither and thither so that he was about to break to pieces?
Then, all at once, the whole thing dawned on him. He had been kidnapped by a couple of crows. The white goosey-gander was still on the shore, waiting, and to-day the wild geese were going to travel to Östergötland.
He was being carried southwest; this he understood because the sun's disc was behind him.
The big forest-carpet which lay beneath him was surely Småland.
"What will become of the goosey-gander now, when I cannot look after him?" thought the boy, and began to call to the crows to take him back to the wild geese instantly. He wasn't at all uneasy on his own account.
He believed that they were carrying him off simply in a spirit of mischief.
The crows didn't pay the slightest attention to his exhortations, but flew on as fast as they could. After a bit, one of them flapped his wings in a manner which meant: "Look out! Danger!"
Soon thereafter they came down in a spruce forest, pushed their way between prickly branches to the ground, and put the boy down under a thick spruce, where he was so well concealed that not even a falcon could have sighted him.
Fifty crows surrounded him, with bills pointed toward him to guard him. "Now perhaps I may hear, crows, what your purpose is in carrying me off", said he. But he was hardly permitted to finish the sentence before a big crow hissed at him: "Keep still!
or I'll bore your eyes out."
It was evident that the crow meant what she said; and there was nothing for the boy to do but obey.
So he sat there and stared at the crows, and the crows stared at him.
The longer he looked at them, the less he liked them. It was dreadful how dusty and unkempt their feather dresses were - as though they knew neither baths nor oiling. Their toes and claws were grimy with dried-in mud, and the corners of their mouths were covered with food drippings.
These were very different birds from the wild geese - that he observed.
He thought they had a cruel, sneaky, watchful and bold appearance, just like cut-throats and vagabonds.
"It is certainly a real robber-band that I've fallen in with," thought he.
Just then he heard the wild geese's call above him.
"Where are you?
Here am I.
Where are you?
Here am I."
He understood that Akka and the others had gone out to search for him; but before he could answer them the big crow who appeared to be the leader of the band hissed in his ear: "Think of your eyes!"
And there was nothing else for him to do but to keep still.
The wild geese may not have known that he was so near them, but had just happened, incidentally, to travel over this forest. He heard their call a couple of times more, then it died away.
"Well, now you'll have to get along by yourself, Nils Holgersson," he said to himself. "
Now you must prove whether you have learned anything during these weeks in the open."
A moment later the crows gave the signal to break up; and since it was still their intention, apparently, to carry him along in such a way that one held on to his shirt-band, and one to a stocking, the boy said: "Is there not one among you so strong that he can carry me on his back?
You have already travelled so badly with me that I feel as if I were in pieces.
Only let me ride!
I'll not jump from the crow's back, that I promise you."
"Oh! you needn't think that we care how you have it," said the leader.
But now the largest of the crows - a dishevelled and uncouth one, who had a white feather in his wing - came forward and said: "It would certainly be best for all of us, Wind-Rush, if Thumbietot got there whole, rather than half, and therefore, I shall carry him on my back."
"If you can do it, Fumle-Drumle, I have no objection," said Wind-Rush. "
But don't lose him!"
With this, much was already gained, and the boy actually felt pleased again.
"There is nothing to be gained by losing my grit because I have been kidnapped by the crows," thought he.
"I'll surely be able to manage those poor little things."
The crows continued to fly southwest, over Småland. It was a glorious morning - sunny and calm; and the birds down on the earth were singing their best love songs. In a high, dark forest sat the thrush himself with drooping wings and swelling throat, and struck up tune after tune.
"How pretty you are!
How pretty you are!
How pretty you are!"
sang he. "
No one is so pretty.
No one is so pretty.
No one is so pretty."
As soon as he had finished this song, he began it all over again.
But just then the boy rode over the forest; and when he had heard the song a couple of times, and marked that the thrush knew no other, he put both hands up to his mouth as a speaking trumpet, and called down: "We've heard all this before.
We've heard all this before." "
Who is it?
Who is it?
Who is it?
Who makes fun of me?"
asked the thrush, and tried to catch a glimpse of the one who called. "
It is Kidnapped-by-Crows who makes fun of your song," answered the boy.
At that, the crow-chief turned his head and said: "Be careful of your eyes, Thumbietot!"
But the boy thought, "Oh!
I don't care about that.
I want to show you that I'm not afraid of you!"
Farther and farther inland they travelled; and there were woods and lakes everywhere. In a birch-grove sat the wood-dove on a naked branch, and before him stood the lady-dove. He blew up his feathers, cocked his head, raised and lowered his body, until the breast-feathers rattled against the branch.
All the while he cooed: "Thou, thou, thou art the loveliest in all the forest.
No one in the forest is so lovely as thou, thou, thou!"
But up in the air the boy rode past, and when he heard Mr. Dove he couldn't keep still.
"Don't you believe him!
Don't you believe him!"
cried he.
"Who, who, who is it that lies about me?" cooed Mr. Dove, and tried to get a sight of the one who shrieked at him. "It is Caught-by-Crows that lies about you," replied the boy.
Again Wind-Rush turned his head toward the boy and commanded him to shut up, but Fumle-Drumle, who was carrying him, said: "Let him chatter, then all the little birds will think that we crows have become quick-witted and funny birds." "
Oh!
they're not such fools, either," said Wind-Rush; but he liked the idea just the same, for after that he let the boy call out as much as he liked.
They flew mostly over forests and woodlands, but there were churches and parishes and little cabins in the outskirts of the forest. In one place they saw a pretty old manor.
It lay with the forest back of it, and the sea in front of it; had red walls and a turreted roof; great sycamores about the grounds, and big, thick gooseberry-bushes in the orchard.
On the top of the weathercock sat the starling, and sang so loud that every note was heard by the wife, who sat on an egg in the heart of a pear tree. "
We have four pretty little eggs," sang the starling. "
We have four pretty little round eggs.
We have the whole nest filled with fine eggs."
When the starling sang the song for the thousandth time, the boy rode over the place.
He put his hands up to his mouth, as a pipe, and called: "The magpie will get them.
The magpie will get them."
"Who is it that wants to frighten me?" asked the starling, and flapped his wings uneasily. "It is Captured-by-Crows that frightens you," said the boy. This time the crow-chief didn't attempt to hush him up.
Instead, both he and his flock were having so much fun that they cawed with satisfaction.
The farther inland they came, the larger were the lakes, and the more plentiful were the islands and points. And on a lake-shore stood a drake and kowtowed before the duck. "I'll be true to you all the days of my life.
I'll be true to you all the days of my life," said the drake. "
It won't last until the summer's end," shrieked the boy. "
Who are you?"
called the drake. "
My name's Stolen-by-Crows," shrieked the boy.
At dinner time the crows lighted in a food-grove. They walked about and procured food for themselves, but none of them thought about giving the boy anything. Then Fumle-Drumle came riding up to the chief with a dog-rose branch, with a few dried buds on it.
"Here's something for you, Wind-Rush," said he. "
This is pretty food, and suitable for you."
Wind-Rush sniffed contemptuously. "
Do you think that I want to eat old, dry buds?"
said he. "
And I who thought that you would be pleased with them!"
said Fumle-Drumle; and threw away the dog-rose branch as if in despair.
But it fell right in front of the boy, and he wasn't slow about grabbing it and eating until he was satisfied.
When the crows had eaten, they began to chatter. "What are you thinking about, Wind-Rush? You are so quiet to-day," said one of them to the leader.
"I'm thinking that in this district there lived, once upon a time, a hen, who was very fond of her mistress; and in order to really please her, she went and laid a nest full of eggs, which she hid under the store-house floor.
The mistress of the house wondered, of course, where the hen was keeping herself such a long time.
She searched for her, but did not find her.
Can you guess, Longbill, who it was that found her and the eggs?"
"I think I can guess it, Wind-Rush, but when you have told about this, I will tell you something like it. Do you remember the big, black cat in Hinneryd's parish house? She was dissatisfied because they always took the new-born kittens from her, and drowned them.
Just once did she succeed in keeping them concealed, and that was when she had laid them in a haystack, out doors.
She was pretty well pleased with those young kittens, but I believe that I got more pleasure out of them than she did."
Now they became so excited that they all talked at once. "What kind of an accomplishment is that - to steal little kittens?" said one. "I once chased a young hare who was almost full-grown. That meant to follow him from covert to covert."
He got no further before another took the words from him. "
It may be fun, perhaps, to annoy hens and cats, but I find it still more remarkable that a crow can worry a human being.
I once stole a silver spoon - "
But now the boy thought he was too good to sit and listen to such gabble. "Now listen to me, you crows!" said he. "I think you ought to be ashamed of yourselves to talk about all your wickedness.
I have lived amongst wild geese for three weeks, and of them I have never heard or seen anything but good.
You must have a bad chief, since he permits you to rob and murder in this way.
You ought to begin to lead new lives, for I can tell you that human beings have grown so tired of your wickedness they are trying with all their might to root you out.
And then there will soon be an end of you."
When Wind-Rush and the crows heard this, they were so furious that they intended to throw themselves upon him and tear him in pieces. But Fumle-Drumle laughed and cawed, and stood in front of him. "Oh, no, no!" said he, and seemed absolutely terrified.
"What think you that Wind-Air will say if you tear Thumbietot in pieces before he has gotten that silver money for us?" "
It has to be you, Fumle-Drumle, that's afraid of women-folk," said Rush.
But, at any rate, both he and the others left Thumbietot in peace.
Shortly after that the crows went further. Until now the boy thought that Småland wasn't such a poor country as he had heard. Of course it was woody and full of mountain-ridges, but alongside the islands and lakes lay cultivated grounds, and any real desolation he hadn't come upon.
But the farther inland they came, the fewer were the villages and cottages.
Toward the last, he thought that he was riding over a veritable wilderness where he saw nothing but swamps and heaths and juniper-hills.
The sun had gone down, but it was still perfect daylight when the crows reached the large heather-heath. Wind-Rush sent a crow on ahead, to say that he had met with success; and when it was known, Wind-Air, with several hundred crows from Crow-Ridge, flew to meet the arrivals.
In the midst of the deafening cawing which the crows emitted, Fumle-Drumle said to the boy: "You have been so comical and so jolly during the trip that I am really fond of you.
Therefore I want to give you some good advice.
As soon as we light, you'll be requested to do a bit of work which may seem very easy to you; but beware of doing it!"
Soon thereafter Fumle-Drumle put Nils Holgersson down in the bottom of a sandpit. The boy flung himself down, rolled over, and lay there as though he was simply done up with fatigue.
Such a lot of crows fluttered about him that the air rustled like a wind-storm, but he didn't look up.
"Thumbietot," said Wind-Rush, "get up now!
You shall help us with a matter which will be very easy for you."
The boy didn't move, but pretended to be asleep. Then Wind-Rush took him by the arm, and dragged him over the sand to an earthen crock of old-time make, that was standing in the pit. "Get up, Thumbietot," said he, "and open this crock!" "Why can't you let me sleep?"
said the boy. "
I'm too tired to do anything to-night.
Wait until to-morrow!"
"Open the crock!" said Wind-Rush, shaking him. "How shall a poor little child be able to open such a crock? Why, it's quite as large as I am myself." "Open it!" commanded Wind-Rush once more, "or it will be a sorry thing for you."
The boy got up, tottered over to the crock, fumbled the clasp, and let his arms fall. "
I'm not usually so weak," said he. "
If you will only let me sleep until morning, I think that I'll be able to manage with that clasp."
But Wind-Rush was impatient, and he rushed forward and pinched the boy in the leg. That sort of treatment the boy didn't care to suffer from a crow.
He jerked himself loose quickly, ran a couple of paces backward, drew his knife from the sheath, and held it extended in front of him. "
You'd better be careful!"
he cried to Wind-Rush.
This one too was so enraged that he didn't dodge the danger. He rushed at the boy, just as though he'd been blind, and ran so straight against the knife, that it entered through his eye into the head.
The boy drew the knife back quickly, but Wind-Rush only struck out with his wings, then he fell down - dead.
"Wind-Rush is dead! The stranger has killed our chieftain, Wind-Rush!" cried the nearest crows, and then there was a terrible uproar. Some wailed, others cried for vengeance. They all ran or fluttered up to the boy, with Fumle-Drumle in the lead. But he acted badly as usual.
He only fluttered and spread his wings over the boy, and prevented the others from coming forward and running their bills into him.
The boy thought that things looked very bad for him now. He couldn't run away from the crows, and there was no place where he could hide. Then he happened to think of the earthen crock. He took a firm hold on the clasp, and pulled it off.
Then he hopped into the crock to hide in it.
But the crock was a poor hiding place, for it was nearly filled to the brim with little, thin silver coins.
The boy couldn't get far enough down, so he stooped and began to throw out the coins.
Until now the crows had fluttered around him in a thick swarm and pecked at him, but when he threw out the coins they immediately forgot their thirst for vengeance, and hurried to gather the money.
The boy threw out handfuls of it, and all the crows - yes, even Wind-Air herself - picked them up.
And everyone who succeeded in picking up a coin ran off to the nest with the utmost speed to conceal it.
When the boy had thrown out all the silver pennies from the crock he glanced up. Not more than a single crow was left in the sandpit. That was Fumle-Drumle, with the white feather in his wing; he who had carried Thumbietot.
"You have rendered me a greater service than you understand," said the crow - with a very different voice, and a different intonation than the one he had used heretofore - "and I want to save your life.
Sit down on my back, and I'll take you to a hiding place where you can be secure for to-night.
To-morrow, I'll arrange it so that you will get back to the wild geese."
THE CABIN
Thursday, April fourteenth.
The following morning when the boy awoke, he lay in a bed. When he saw that he was in a house with four walls around him, and a roof over him, he thought that he was at home.
"I wonder if mother will come soon with some coffee," he muttered to himself where he lay half-awake.
Then he remembered that he was in a deserted cabin on the crow-ridge, and that Fumle-Drumle with the white feather had borne him there the night before.
The boy was sore all over after the journey he had made the day before, and he thought it was lovely to lie still while he waited for Fumle-Drumle who had promised to come and fetch him.
Curtains of checked cotton hung before the bed, and he drew them aside to look out into the cabin. It dawned upon him instantly that he had never seen the mate to a cabin like this.
The walls consisted of nothing but a couple of rows of logs; then the roof began.
There was no interior ceiling, so he could look clear up to the roof-tree.
The cabin was so small that it appeared to have been built rather for such as he than for real people.
However, the fireplace and chimney were so large, he thought that he had never seen larger.
The entrance door was in a gable-wall at the side of the fireplace, and was so narrow that it was more like a wicket than a door.
In the other gable-wall he saw a low and broad window with many panes.
There was scarcely any movable furniture in the cabin.
The bench on one side, and the table under the window, were also stationary - also the big bed where he lay, and the many-coloured cupboard.
The boy could not help wondering who owned the cabin, and why it was deserted. It certainly looked as though the people who had lived there expected to return.
The coffee-urn and the gruel-pot stood on the hearth, and there was some wood in the fireplace; the oven-rake and baker's peel stood in a corner; the spinning wheel was raised on a bench; on the shelf over the window lay oakum and flax, a couple of skeins of yarn, a candle, and a bunch of matches.
Yes, it surely looked as if those who had lived there had intended to come back. There were bed-clothes on the bed; and on the walls there still hung long strips of cloth, upon which three riders named Kasper, Melchior, and Baltasar were painted.
The same horses and riders were pictured many times.
They rode around the whole cabin, and continued their ride even up toward the joists.
But in the roof the boy saw something which brought him to his senses in a jiffy. It was a couple of loaves of big bread-cakes that hung there upon a spit. They looked old and mouldy, but it was bread all the same.
He gave them a knock with the oven-rake and one piece fell to the floor.
He ate, and stuffed his bag full.
It was incredible how good bread was, anyway.
He looked around the cabin once more, to try and discover if there was anything else which he might find useful to take along. "I may as well take what I need, since no one else cares about it," thought he.
But most of the things were too big and heavy.
The only things that he could carry might be a few matches perhaps.
He clambered up on the table, and swung with the help of the curtains up to the window-shelf. While he stood there and stuffed the matches into his bag, the crow with the white feather came in through the window.
"Well here I am at last," said Fumle-Drumle as he lit on the table. "
I couldn't get here any sooner because we crows have elected a new chieftain in Wind-Rush's place." "
Whom have you chosen?"
said the boy. "
Well, we have chosen one who will not permit robbery and injustice.
We have elected Garm Whitefeather, lately called Fumle-Drumle," answered he, drawing himself up until he looked absolutely regal. "
That was a good choice," said the boy and congratulated him.
"You may well wish me luck," said Garm; then he told the boy about the time they had had with Wind-Rush and Wind-Air.
During this recital the boy heard a voice outside the window which he thought sounded familiar. "Is he here? " - inquired the fox. "Yes, he's hidden in there," answered a crow-voice. "Be careful, Thumbietot!" cried Garm. "Wind-Air stands without with that fox who wants to eat you."
More he didn't have time to say, for Smirre dashed against the window.
The old, rotten window-frame gave way, and the next second Smirre stood upon the window-table.
Garm Whitefeather, who didn't have time to fly away, he killed instantly.
Thereupon he jumped down to the floor, and looked around for the boy.
He tried to hide behind a big oakum-spiral, but Smirre had already spied him, and was crouched for the final spring.
The cabin was so small, and so low, the boy understood that the fox could reach him without the least difficulty.
But just at that moment the boy was not without weapons of defence.
He struck a match quickly, touched the curtains, and when they were in flames, he threw them down upon Smirre Fox.
When the fire enveloped the fox, he was seized with a mad terror.
He thought no more about the boy, but rushed wildly out of the cabin.
But it looked as if the boy had escaped one danger to throw himself into a greater one. From the tuft of oakum which he had flung at Smirre the fire had spread to the bed-hangings. He jumped down and tried to smother it, but it blazed too quickly now.
The cabin was soon filled with smoke, and Smirre Fox, who had remained just outside the window, began to grasp the state of affairs within. "
Well, Thumbietot," he called out, "which do you choose now: to be broiled alive in there, or to come out here to me?
Of course, I should prefer to have the pleasure of eating you; but in whichever way death meets you it will be dear to me."
The boy could not think but what the fox was right, for the fire was making rapid headway. The whole bed was now in a blaze, and smoke rose from the floor; and along the painted wall-strips the fire crept from rider to rider.
The boy jumped up in the fireplace, and tried to open the oven door, when he heard a key which turned around slowly in the lock.
It must be human beings coming.
And in the dire extremity in which he found himself, he was not afraid, but only glad.
He was already on the threshold when the door opened.
He saw a couple of children facing him; but how they looked when they saw the cabin in flames, he took no time to find out; but rushed past them into the open.
He didn't dare run far. He knew, of course, that Smirre Fox lay in wait for him, and he understood that he must remain near the children.
He turned round to see what sort of folk they were, but he hadn't looked at them a second before he ran up to them and cried: "Oh, good-day, Osa goose-girl!
Oh, good-day, little Mats!"
For when the boy saw those children he forgot entirely where he was. Crows and burning cabin and talking animals had vanished from his memory.
He was walking on a stubble-field, in West Vemminghög, tending a goose-flock; and beside him, on the field, walked those same Småland children, with their geese.
As soon as he saw them, he ran up on the stone-hedge and shouted: "Oh, good-day, Osa goose-girl!
Oh, good-day, little Mats!"
But when the children saw such a little creature coming up to them with outstretched hands, they grabbed hold of each other, took a couple of steps backward, and looked scared to death.
When the boy noticed their terror he woke up and remembered who he was. And then it seemed to him that nothing worse could happen to him than that those children should see how he had been bewitched.
Shame and grief because he was no longer a human being overpowered him.
He turned and fled.
He knew not whither.
But a glad meeting awaited the boy when he came down to the heath. For there, in the heather, he spied something white, and toward him came the white goosey-gander, accompanied by Dunfin.
When the white one saw the boy running with such speed, he thought that dreadful fiends were pursuing him.
He flung him in all haste upon his back and flew off with him.
Thursday, April fourteenth.
Three tired wanderers were out in the late evening in search of a night harbour. They travelled over a poor and desolate portion of northern Småland.
But the sort of resting place which they wanted, they should have been able to find; for they were no weaklings who asked for soft beds or comfortable rooms.
"If one of these long mountain-ridges had a peak so high and steep that a fox couldn't in any way climb up to it, then we should have a good sleeping-place," said one of them.
"If a single one of the big swamps was thawed out, and was so marshy and wet that a fox wouldn't dare venture out on it, this, too, would be a right good night harbour," said the second.
"If the ice on one of the large lakes we travel past were loose, so that a fox could not come out on it, then we should have found just what we are seeking," said the third.
The worst of it was that when the sun had gone down, two of the travellers became so sleepy that every second they were ready to fall to the ground. The third one, who could keep himself awake, grew more and more uneasy as night approached.
"Then it was a misfortune that we came to a land where lakes and swamps are frozen, so that a fox can get around everywhere.
In other places the ice has melted away; but now we're well up in the very coldest Småland, where spring has not as yet arrived.
I don't know how I shall ever manage to find a good sleeping-place!
Unless I find some spot that is well protected, Smirre Fox will be upon us before morning."
He gazed in all directions, but he saw no shelter where he could lodge.
It was a dark and chilly night, with wind and drizzle.
It grew more terrible and disagreeable around him every second.
This may sound strange, perhaps, but the travellers didn't seem to have the least desire to ask for house-room on any farm. They had already passed many parishes without knocking at a single door.
Little hillside cabins on the outskirts of the forests, which all poor wanderers are glad to run across, they took no notice of either.
One might almost be tempted to say they deserved to have a hard time of it, since they did not seek help where it was to be had for the asking.
But finally, when it was so dark that there was scarcely a glimmer of light left under the skies and the two who needed sleep journeyed on in a kind of half-sleep, they happened into a farmyard which was a long way off from all neighbours.
And not only did it lie there desolate, but it appeared to be uninhabited as well.
No smoke rose from the chimney; no light shone through the windows; no human being moved on the place.
When the one among the three who could keep awake, saw the place, he thought: "Now come what may, we must try to get in here.
Anything better we are not likely to find."
Soon after that, all three stood in the house-yard. Two of them fell asleep the instant they stood still, but the third looked about him eagerly, to find where they could get under cover. It was not a small farm.
Beside the dwelling house and stable and smoke-house, there were long ranges with granaries and storehouses and cattlesheds.
But it all looked awfully poor and dilapidated.
The houses had gray, moss-grown, leaning walls, which seemed ready to topple over.
In the roofs were yawning holes, and the doors hung aslant on broken hinges.
It was apparent that no one had taken the trouble to drive a nail into a wall on this place for a long time.
Meanwhile, he who was awake had figured out which house was the cowshed. He roused his travelling companions from their sleep, and conducted them to the cowshed door. Luckily, this was not fastened with anything but a hook, which he could easily push up with a rod.
He heaved a sigh of relief at the thought that they should soon be in safety.
But when the cowshed door swung open with a sharp creaking, he heard a cow begin to bellow. "
Are you coming at last, mistress?"
said she.
"I thought that you didn't propose to give me any supper to-night."
The one who was awake stopped in the doorway, absolutely terrified when he discovered that the cowshed was not empty. But he soon saw that there was not more than one cow, and three or four chickens; and then he took courage again.
"We are three poor travellers who want to come in somewhere, where no fox can assail us, and no human being capture us," said he. "
We wonder if this can be a good place for us." "
I cannot believe but what it is," answered the cow.
"To be sure the walls are poor, but the fox does not walk through them as yet; and no one lives here except an old peasant woman, who isn't at all likely to make a captive of anyone.
But who are you?"
she continued, as she twisted in her stall to get a sight of the newcomers. "
I am Nils Holgersson from Vemminghög, who has been transformed into an elf," replied the first of the incomers, "and I have with me a tame goose, whom I generally ride, and a gray goose."
"Such rare guests have never before been within my four walls," said the cow, "and you shall be welcome, although I would have preferred that it had been my mistress, come to give me my supper."
The boy led the geese into the cowshed, which was rather large, and placed them in an empty manger, where they fell asleep instantly.
For himself, he made a little bed of straw and expected that he, too, should go to sleep at once.
But this was impossible, for the poor cow, who hadn't had her supper, wasn't still an instant. She shook her flanks, moved around in the stall, and complained of how hungry she was.
The boy couldn't get a wink of sleep, but lay there and lived over all the things that had happened to him during these last days.
He thought of Osa, the goose-girl, and little Mats, whom he had encountered so unexpectedly; and he fancied that the little cabin which he had set on fire must have been their old home in Småland.
Now he recalled that he had heard them speak of just such a cabin, and of the big heather-heath which lay below it.
Now Osa and Mats had wandered back there to see their old home again, and then, when they had reached it, it was in flames.
It was indeed a great sorrow which he had brought upon them, and it hurt him very much.
If he ever again became a human being, he would try to compensate them for the damage and miscalculation.
Then his thoughts wandered to the crows. And when he thought of Fumle-Drumle who had saved his life, and had met his own death so soon after he had been elected chieftain, he was so distressed that tears filled his eyes.
He had had a pretty rough time of it these last few days.
But, anyway, it was a rare stroke of luck that the goosey-gander and Dunfin had found him.
The goosey-gander had said that as soon as the geese discovered that Thumbietot had disappeared, they had asked all the small animals in the forest about him.
They soon learned that a flock of Småland crows had carried him off.
But the crows were already out of sight, and whither they had directed their course no one had been able to say.
That they might find the boy as soon as possible, Akka had commanded the wild geese to start out - two and two - in different directions, to search for him.
But after a two days' hunt, whether or not they had found him, they were to meet in northwestern Småland on a high mountain-top, which resembled an abrupt, chopped-off tower, and was called Taberg.
After Akka had given them the best directions, and described carefully how they should find Taberg, they had separated.
The white goosey-gander had chosen Dunfin as travelling companion, and they had flown about hither and thither with the greatest anxiety for Thumbietot. During this ramble they had heard a thrush, who sat in a tree-top, cry and wail that someone, who called himself Kidnapped-by-Crows, had made fun of him.
They had talked with the thrush, and he had shown them in which direction that Kidnapped-by-Crows had travelled.
Afterward, they had met a dove-cock, a starling and a drake; they had all wailed about a little culprit who had disturbed their song, and who was named Caught-by-Crows, Captured-by-Crows, and Stolen-by-Crows.
In this way, they were enabled to trace Thumbietot all the way to the heather-heath in Sonnerbo township.
As soon as the goosey-gander and Dunfin had found Thumbietot, they had started toward the north, in order to reach Taberg. But it had been a long road to travel, and the darkness was upon them before they had sighted the mountain top.
"If we only get there by to-morrow, surely all our troubles will be over," thought the boy, and dug down into the straw to have it warmer.
All the while the cow fussed and fumed in the stall.
Then, all of a sudden, she began to talk to the boy.
"Everything is wrong with me," said the cow. "
I am neither milked nor tended.
I have no night fodder in my manger, and no bed has been made under me.
My mistress came here at dusk, to put things in order for me, but she felt so ill, that she had to go in soon again, and she has not returned."
"It's distressing that I should be little and powerless," said the boy. "I don't believe that I am able to help you." "You can't make me believe that you are powerless because you are little," said the cow.
"All the elves that I've ever heard of, were so strong that they could pull a whole load of hay and strike a cow dead with one fist."
The boy couldn't help laughing at the cow. "
They were a very different kind of elf from me," said he.
"But I'll loosen your halter and open the door for you, so that you can go out and drink in one of the pools on the place, and then I'll try to climb up to the hayloft and throw down some hay in your manger."
"Yes, that would be some help," said the cow.
The boy did as he had said; and when the cow stood with a full manger in front of her, he thought that at last he should get some sleep.
But he had hardly crept down in the bed before she began, anew, to talk to him.
"You'll be clean put out with me if I ask you for one thing more," said the cow. "Oh, no I won't, if it's only something that I'm able to do," said the boy.
"Then I will ask you to go into the cabin, directly opposite, and find out how my mistress is getting along.
I fear some misfortune has come to her." "
No!
I can't do that," said the boy. "
I dare not show myself before human beings."
"'Surely you're not afraid of an old and sick woman," said the cow. "
But you do not need to go into the cabin.
Just stand outside the door and peep in through the crack!" "
Oh!
if that is all you ask of me, I'll do it of course," said the boy.
With that he opened the cowshed door and went out in the yard. It was a fearful night! Neither moon nor stars shone; the wind blew a gale, and the rain came down in torrents.
And the worst of all was that seven great owls sat in a row on the eaves of the cabin.
It was awful just to hear them, where they sat and grumbled at the weather; but it was even worse to think what would happen to him if one of them should set eyes on him.
That would be the last of him.
"Pity him who is little!" said the boy as he ventured out in the yard.
And he had a right to say this, for he was blown down twice before he got to the house: once the wind swept him into a pool, which was so deep that he came near drowning.
But he got there nevertheless.
He clambered up a pair of steps, scrambled over a threshold, and came into the hallway. The cabin door was closed, but down in one corner a large piece had been cut away, that the cat might go in and out.
It was no difficulty whatever for the boy to see how things were in the cabin.
He had hardly cast a glance in there before he staggered back and turned his head away. An old, gray-haired woman lay stretched out on the floor within. She neither moved nor moaned; and her face shone strangely white.
It was as if an invisible moon had thrown a feeble light over it.
The boy remembered that when his grandfather had died, his face had also become so strangely white-like. And he understood that the old woman who lay on the cabin floor must be dead.
Death had probably come to her so suddenly that she didn't even have time to lie down on her bed.
As he thought of being alone with the dead in the middle of the dark night, he was terribly afraid.
He threw himself headlong down the steps, and rushed back to the cowshed.
When he told the cow what he had seen in the cabin, she stopped eating. "So my mistress is dead," said she. "Then it will soon be over for me as well." "There will always be someone to look out for you," said the boy comfortingly. "Ah!
you don't know," said the cow, "that I am already twice as old as a cow usually is before she is laid upon the slaughter-bench.
But then I do not care to live any longer, since she, in there, can come no more to care for me."
She said nothing more for a while, but the boy observed, no doubt, that she neither slept nor ate. It was not long before she began to speak again. "Is she lying on the bare floor?" she asked. "She is," said the boy.
"She had a habit of coming out to the cowshed," she continued, "and talking about everything that troubled her.
I understood what she said, although I could not answer her.
These last few days she talked of how afraid she was lest there would be no one with her when she died.
She was anxious for fear no one should close her eyes and fold her hands across her breast, after she was dead.
Perhaps you'll go in and do this?"
The boy hesitated.
He remembered that when his grandfather had died, mother had been very careful about putting everything to rights.
He knew this was something which had to be done.
But, on the other hand, he felt that he didn't care go to the dead, in the ghastly night.
He didn't say no; neither did he take a step toward the cowshed door.
For a couple of seconds the old cow was silent - just as if she had expected an answer.
But when the boy said nothing, she did not repeat her request.
Instead, she began to talk with him of her mistress.
There was much to tell, first and foremost, about all the children which she had brought up.
They had been in the cowshed every day, and in the summer they had taken the cattle to pasture on the swamp and in the groves, so the old cow knew all about them.
They had been splendid, all of them, and happy and industrious.
A cow knew well enough what her caretakers were good for.
There was also much to be said about the farm. It had not always been as poor as it was now. It was very large - although the greater part of it consisted of swamps and stony groves.
There was not much room for fields, but there was plenty of good fodder everywhere.
At one time there had been a cow for every stall in the cowshed; and the oxshed, which was now empty, had at one time been filled with oxen.
And then there was life and gayety, both in cabin and cowhouse.
When the mistress opened the cowshed door she would hum and sing, and all the cows lowed with gladness when they heard her coming.
But the good man had died when the children were so small that they could not be of any assistance, and the mistress had to take charge of the farm, and all the work and responsibility. She had been as strong as a man, and had both ploughed and reaped.
In the evenings, when she came into the cowshed to milk, sometimes she was so tired that she wept.
Then she dashed away her tears, and was cheerful again. "
It doesn't matter.
Good times are coming again for me too, if only my children grow up.
Yes, if they only grow up."
But as soon as the children were grown, a strange longing came over them. They didn't want to stay at home, but went away to a strange country. Their mother never got any help from them.
A couple of her children were married before they went away, and they had left their children behind, in the old home.
And now these children followed the mistress in the cowshed, just as her own had done.
They tended the cows, and were fine, good folk.
And, in the evenings, when the mistress was so tired out that she could fall asleep in the middle of the milking, she would rouse herself again to renewed courage by thinking of them. "
Good times are coming for me, too," said she&#8212;and shook off sleep&#8212;"when once they are grown."
But when these children grew up, they went away to their parents in the strange land.
No one came back&#8212;no one stayed at home&#8212;the old mistress was left alone on the farm.
Probably she had never asked them to remain with her. "Think you, R&#246;dlinna, that I would ask them to stay here with me, when they can go out in the world and have things comfortable?" she would say as she stood in the stall with the old cow.
"Here in Sm&#229;land they have only poverty to look forward to."
But when the last grandchild was gone, it was all up with the mistress. All at once she became bent and gray, and tottered as she walked; as if she no longer had the strength to move about. She stopped working.
She did not care to look after the farm, but let everything go to rack and ruin.
She didn't repair the houses; and she sold both the cows and the oxen.
The only one that she kept was the old cow who now talked with Thumbietot.
Her she let live because all the children had tended her.
She could have taken maids and farm-hands into her service, who would have helped her with the work, but she couldn't bear to see strangers around her, since her own had deserted her.
Perhaps she was better satisfied to let the farm go to ruin, since none of her children were coming back to take it after she was gone.
She did not mind that she herself became poor, because she didn't value that which was only hers.
But she was troubled lest the children should find out how hard she had it. "
If only the children do not hear of this!
If only the children do not hear of this!"
she sighed as she tottered through the cowhouse.
The children wrote constantly, and begged her to come out to them; but this she did not wish. She didn't want to see the land that had taken them from her. She was angry with it.
"It's foolish of me, perhaps, that I do not like that land which has been so good for them," said she. "
But I don't want to see it."
She never thought of anything but the children, and of this&#8212;that they must needs have gone. When summer came, she led the cow out to graze in the big swamp.
All day she would sit on the edge of the swamp, her hands in her lap; and on the way home she would say: "You see, R&#246;dlinna, if there had been large, rich fields here, in place of these barren swamps, then there would have been no need for them to leave."
She could become furious with the swamp which spread out so big, and did no good.
She could sit and talk about how it was the swamp's fault that the children had left her.
This last evening she had been more trembly and feeble than ever before. She could not even do the milking. She had leaned against the manger and talked about two strangers who had been to see her, and had asked if they might buy the swamp.
They wanted to drain it, and sow and raise grain on it.
This had made her both anxious and glad. "
Do you hear, R&#246;dlinna," she had said, "do you hear they said that grain can grow on the swamp?
Now I shall write to the children to come home.
Now they'll not have to stay away any longer; for now they can get their bread here at home."
It was this that she had gone into the cabin to do&#8212;
The boy heard no more of what the old cow said.
He had opened the cowhouse door and gone across the yard, and in to the dead whom he had but lately been so afraid of.
It was not so poor in the cabin as he had expected. It was well supplied with the sort of things one generally finds among those who have relatives in America.
In a corner there was an American rocking chair; on the table before the window lay a brocaded plush cover; there was a pretty spread on the bed; on the walls, in carved-wood frames, hung the photographs of the children and grandchildren who had gone away; on the bureau stood high vases and a couple of candlesticks, with thick, spiral candles in them.
The boy searched for a matchbox and lighted these candles, not because he needed more light than he already had; but because he thought that this was one way to honour the dead.
Then he went up to her, closed her eyes, folded her hands across her breast, and stroked back the thin gray hair from her face.
He thought no more about being afraid of her.
He was so deeply grieved because she had been forced to live out her old age in loneliness and longing.
He, at least, would watch over her dead body this night.
He hunted up the psalm book, and seated himself to read a couple of psalms in an undertone.
But in the middle of the reading he paused&#8212;because he had begun to think about his mother and father.
Think, that parents can long so for their children!
This he had never known.
Think, that life can be as though it was over for them when the children are away!
Think, if those at home longed for him in the same way that this old peasant woman had longed!
This thought made him happy, but he dared not believe in it.
He had not been such a one that anybody could long for him.
But what he had not been, perhaps he could become.
Round about him he saw the portraits of those who were away. They were big, strong men and women with earnest faces. There were brides in long veils, and gentlemen in fine clothes; and there were children with waved hair and pretty white dresses.
And he thought that they all stared blindly into vacancy&#8212;and did not want to see.
"Poor you!"
said the boy to the portraits.
"Your mother is dead.
You cannot make reparation now, because you went away from her.
But my mother is living!"
Here he paused, and nodded and smiled to himself.
"My mother is living," said he.
"Both father and mother are living."
Friday, April fifteenth.
The boy sat awake nearly all night, but toward morning he fell asleep and then he dreamed of his father and mother. He could hardly recognise them. They had both grown gray, and had old and wrinkled faces.
He asked how this had come about, and they answered that they had aged so because they had longed for him.
He was both touched and astonished, for he had never believed but what they were glad to be rid of him.
When the boy awoke the morning was come, with fine, clear weather.
First, he himself ate a bit of bread which he found in the cabin; then he gave morning feed to both geese and cow, and opened the cowhouse door so that the cow could go over to the nearest farm.
When the cow came along all by herself the neighbours would no doubt understand that something was wrong with her mistress.
They would hurry over to the desolate farm to see how the old woman was getting along, and then they would find her dead body and bury it.
The boy and the geese had barely raised themselves into the air, when they caught a glimpse of a high mountain, with almost perpendicular walls, and an abrupt, broken-off top; and they understood that this must be Taberg.
On the summit stood Akka, with Yksi and Kaksi, Kolmi and Neljä, Viisi and Knusi, and all six goslings and waited for them.
There was a rejoicing, and a cackling, and a fluttering, and a calling which no one can describe, when they saw that the goosey-gander and Dunfin had succeeded in finding Thumbietot.
The woods grew pretty high up on Taberg's sides, but her highest peak was barren; and from there one could look out in all directions.
If one gazed toward the east, or south, or west, then there was hardly anything to be seen but a poor highland with dark spruce-trees, brown morasses, ice-clad lakes, and bluish mountain-ridges.
The boy couldn't keep from thinking it was true that the one who had created this hadn't taken very great pains with his work, but had thrown it together in a hurry.
But if one glanced to the north, it was altogether different.
Here it looked as if it had been worked out with the utmost care and affection.
In this direction one saw only beautiful mountains, soft valleys, and winding rivers, all the way to the big Lake Vettern, which lay ice-free and transparently clear, and shone as if it wasn't filled with water but with blue light.
It was Vettern that made it so pretty to look toward the north, because it looked as though a blue stream had risen up from the lake, and spread itself over land also.
Groves and hills and roofs, and the spires of Jönköping City - which shimmered along Vettern's shores - lay enveloped in pale blue which caressed the eye.
If there were countries in heaven, they, too, must be blue like this, thought the boy, and imagined that he had gotten a faint idea of how it must look in Paradise.
Later in the day, when the geese continued their journey, they flew up toward the blue valley.
They were in holiday humour; shrieked and made such a racket that no one who had ears could help hearing them.
This happened to be the first really fine spring day they had had in this section.
Until now, the spring had done its work under rain and bluster; and now, when it had all of a sudden become fine weather, the people were filled with such a longing after summer warmth and green woods that they could hardly perform their tasks.
And when the wild geese rode by, high above the ground, cheerful and free, there wasn't one who did not drop what he had in hand, and glance at them.
The first ones who saw the wild geese that day were miners on Taberg, who were digging ore at the mouth of the mine. When they heard them cackle, they paused in their drilling for ore, and one of them called to the birds: "Where are you going?
Where are you going?"
The geese didn't understand what he said, but the boy leaned forward over the goose-back, and answered for them: "Where there is neither pick nor hammer."
When the miners heard the words, they thought it was their own longing that made the goose-cackle sound like human speech. "
Take us along with you!
Take us along with you!"
they cried. "
Not this year," shrieked the boy. "
Not this year."
The wild geese followed Taberg River down toward Monk Lake, and all the while they made the same racket. Here, on the narrow land-strip between Monk and Vettern lakes, lay Jönköping with its great factories. The wild geese rode first over Monksjö paper mills.
The noon rest hour was just over, and the big workmen were streaming down to the mill-gate.
When they heard the wild geese, they stopped a moment to listen to them. "
Where are you going?
Where are you going?"
called the workmen.
The wild geese understood nothing of what they said, but the boy answered for them: "There, where there are neither machines nor steam-boxes."
When the workmen heard the answer, they believed it was their own longing that made the goose-cackle sound like human speech. "
Take us along with you!"
"Not this year," answered the boy. "
Not this year."
Next, the geese rode over the well-known match factory, which lies on the shores of Vettern - large as a fortress - and lifts its high chimneys toward the sky. Not a soul moved out in the yards; but in a large hall young working-women sat and filled match-boxes.
They had opened a window on account of the beautiful weather, and through it came the wild geese's call.
The one who sat nearest the window, leaned out with a match-box in her hand, and cried: "Where are you going?
Where are you going?"
"To that land where there is no need of either light or matches," said the boy.
The girl thought that what she had heard was only goose-cackle; but since she thought she had distinguished a couple of words, she called out in answer: "Take me along with you!"
"Not this year," replied the boy. "
Not this year."
East of the factories rises Jönköping, on the most glorious spot that any city can occupy.
The narrow Vettern has high, steep sand-shores, both on the eastern and western sides; but straight south, the sand-walls are broken down, just as if to make room for a large gate, through which one reaches the lake.
And in the middle of the gate - with mountains to the left, and mountains to the right, with Monk Lake behind it, and Vettern in front of it - lies Jönköping.
The wild geese travelled forward over the long, narrow city, and behaved themselves here just as they had done in the country. But in the city there was no one who answered them.
It was not to be expected that city folks should stop out in the streets, and call to the wild geese.
The trip extended further along Vettern's shores; and after a little they came to Sanna Sanitarium. Some of the patients had gone out on the veranda to enjoy the spring air, and in this way they heard the goose-cackle. "Where are you going?"
asked one of them with such a feeble voice that he was scarcely heard. "
To that land where there is neither sorrow nor sickness," answered the boy. "
Take us along with you!"
said the sick ones. "
Not this year," answered the boy. "
Not this year."
When they had travelled still farther on, they came to Huskvarna. It lay in a valley. The mountains around it were steep and beautifully formed. A river rushed along the heights in long and narrow falls.
Big workshops and factories lay below the mountain walls; and scattered over the valley-bottom were the workingmens' homes, encircled by little gardens; and in the centre of the valley lay the schoolhouse.
Just as the wild geese came along, a bell rang, and a crowd of school children marched out in line.
They were so numerous that the whole schoolyard was filled with them. "
Where are you going?
Where are you going?"
the children shouted when they heard the wild geese.
"Where there are neither books nor lessons to be found," answered the boy. "
Take us along!"
shrieked the children. "
Not this year, but next," cried the boy. "
Not this year, but next."
JARRO, THE WILD DUCK
On the eastern shore of Vettern lies Mount Omberg; east of Omberg lies Dagmosse; east of Dagmosse lies Lake Takern.
Around the whole of Takern spreads the big, even Östergöta plain.
Takern is a pretty large lake and in olden times it must have been still larger. But then the people thought it covered entirely too much of the fertile plain, so they attempted to drain the water from it, that they might sow and reap on the lake-bottom.
But they did not succeed in laying waste the entire lake - which had evidently been their intention - therefore it still hides a lot of land.
Since the draining the lake has become so shallow that hardly at any point is it more than a couple of metres deep.
The shores have become marshy and muddy; and out in the lake, little mud-islets stick up above the water's surface.
Now, there is one who loves to stand with his feet in the water, if he can just keep his body and head in the air, and that is the reed.
And it cannot find a better place to grow upon, than the long, shallow Takern shores, and around the little mud-islets.
It thrives so well that it grows taller than a man's height, and so thick that it is almost impossible to push a boat through it.
It forms a broad green enclosure around the whole lake, so that it is only accessible in a few places where the people have taken away the reeds.
But if the reeds shut the people out, they give, in return, shelter and protection to many other things.
In the reeds there are a lot of little dams and canals with green, still water, where duckweed and pondweed run to seed; and where gnat-eggs and blackfish and worms are hatched out in uncountable masses.
And all along the shores of these little dams and canals, there are many well-concealed places, where seabirds hatch their eggs, and bring up their young without being disturbed, either by enemies or food worries.
An incredible number of birds live in the Takern reeds; and more and more gather there every year, as it becomes known what a splendid abode it is. The first who settled there were the wild ducks; and they still live there by thousands.
But they no longer own the entire lake, for they have been obliged to share it with swans, grebes, coots, loons, fen-ducks, and a lot of others.
Takern is certainly the largest and choicest bird lake in the whole country; and the birds may count themselves lucky as long as they own such a retreat.
But it is uncertain just how long they will be in control of reeds and mud-banks, for human beings cannot forget that the lake extends over a considerable portion of good and fertile soil; and every now and then the proposition to drain it comes up among them.
And if these propositions were carried out, the many thousands of water-birds would be forced to move from this quarter.
At the time when Nils Holgersson travelled around with the wild geese, there lived at Takern a wild duck named Jarro. He was a young bird, who had only lived one summer, one fall, and a winter; now, it was his first spring.
He had just returned from South Africa, and had reached Takern in such good season that the ice was still on the lake.
One evening, when he and the other young wild ducks played at racing backward and forward over the lake, a hunter fired a couple of shots at them, and Jarro was wounded in the breast.
He thought he should die; but in order that the one who had shot him shouldn't get him into his power, he continued to fly as long as he possibly could.
He didn't think whither he was directing his course, but only struggled to get far away.
When his strength failed him, so that he could not fly any farther, he was no longer on the lake.
He had flown a bit inland, and now he sank down before the entrance to one of the big farms which lie along the shores of Takern.
A moment later a young farm-hand happened along.
He saw Jarro, and came and lifted him up.
But Jarro, who asked for nothing but to be let die in peace, gathered his last powers and nipped the farm-hand in the finger, so he should let go of him.
Jarro didn't succeed in freeing himself. The encounter had this good in it at any rate: the farm-hand noticed that the bird was alive. He carried him very gently into the cottage, and showed him to the mistress of the house - a young woman with a kindly face.
At once she took Jarro from the farm-hand, stroked him on the back and wiped away the blood which trickled down through the neck-feathers.
She looked him over very carefully; and when she saw how pretty he was, with his dark-green, shining head, his white neck-band, his brownish-red back, and his blue wing-mirror, she must have thought that it was a pity for him to die.
She promptly put a basket in order, and tucked the bird into it.
All the while Jarro fluttered and struggled to get loose; but when he understood that the people didn't intend to kill him, he settled down in the basket with a sense of pleasure. Now it was evident how exhausted he was from pain and loss of blood.
The mistress carried the basket across the floor to place it in the corner by the fireplace; but before she put it down Jarro was already fast asleep.
In a little while Jarro was awakened by someone who nudged him gently. When he opened his eyes he experienced such an awful shock that he almost lost his senses.
Now he was lost; for there stood the one who was more dangerous than either human beings or birds of prey.
It was no less a thing than Caesar himself - the long-haired dog - who nosed around him inquisitively.
How pitifully scared had he not been last summer, when he was still a little yellow-down duckling, every time it had sounded over the reed-stems: "Caesar is coming! Caesar is coming!"
When he had seen the brown and white spotted dog with the teeth-filled jowls come wading through the reeds, he had believed that he beheld death itself.
He had always hoped that he would never have to live through that moment when he should meet Caesar face to face.
But, to his sorrow, he must have fallen down in the very yard where Caesar lived, for there he stood right over him.
"Who are you?"
he growled.
"How did you get into the house?
Don't you belong down among the reed banks?"
It was with great difficulty that he gained the courage to answer.
"Don't be angry with me, Caesar, because I came into the house!"
said he.
"It isn't my fault.
I have been wounded by a gunshot.
It was the people themselves who laid me in this basket."
"Oho! so it's the folks themselves that have placed you here," said Caesar. "Then it is surely their intention to cure you; although, for my part, I think it would be wiser for them to eat you up, since you are in their power.
But, at any rate, you are tabooed in the house.
You needn't look so scared.
Now, we're not down on Takern."
With that Caesar laid himself to sleep in front of the blazing log-fire.
As soon as Jarro understood that this terrible danger was past, extreme lassitude came over him, and he fell asleep anew.
The next time Jarro awoke, he saw that a dish with grain and water stood before him. He was still quite ill, but he felt hungry nevertheless, and began to eat. When the mistress saw that he ate, she came up and petted him, and looked pleased.
After that, Jarro fell asleep again.
For several days he did nothing but eat and sleep.
One morning Jarro felt so well that he stepped from the basket and wandered along the floor. But he hadn't gone very far before he keeled over, and lay there. Then came Caesar, opened his big jaws and grabbed him.
Jarro believed, of course, that the dog was going to bite him to death; but Caesar carried him back to the basket without harming him.
Because of this, Jarro acquired such a confidence in the dog Caesar, that on his next walk in the cottage, he went over to the dog and lay down beside him.
Thereafter Caesar and he became good friends, and every day, for several hours, Jarro lay and slept between Caesar's paws.
But an even greater affection than he felt for Caesar, did Jarro feel toward his mistress. Of her he had not the least fear; but rubbed his head against her hand when she came and fed him.
Whenever she went out of the cottage he sighed with regret; and when she came back he cried welcome to her in his own language.
Jarro forgot entirely how afraid he had been of both dogs and humans in other days. He thought now that they were gentle and kind, and he loved them.
He wished that he were well, so he could fly down to Takern and tell the wild ducks that their enemies were not dangerous, and that they need not fear them.
He had observed that the human beings, as well as Caesar, had calm eyes, which it did one good to look into. The only one in the cottage whose glance he did not care to meet, was Clawina, the house cat.
She did him no harm, either, but he couldn't place any confidence in her.
Then, too, she quarrelled with him constantly, because he loved human beings. "
You think they protect you because they are fond of you," said Clawina. "
You just wait until you are fat enough!
Then they'll wring the neck off you.
I know them, I do."
Jarro, like all birds, had a tender and affectionate heart; and he was unutterably distressed when he heard this.
He couldn't imagine that his mistress would wish to wring the neck off him, nor could he believe any such thing of her son, the little boy who sat for hours beside his basket, and babbled and chattered.
He seemed to think that both of them had the same love for him that he had for them.
One day, when Jarro and Caesar lay on the usual spot before the fire, Clawina sat on the hearth and began to tease the wild duck.
"I wonder, Jarro, what you wild ducks will do next year, when Takern is drained and turned into grain fields?" said Clawina. "What's that you say, Clawina?" cried Jarro, and jumped up - scared through and through.
"I always forget, Jarro, that you do not understand human speech, like Caesar and myself," answered the cat.
"Or else you surely would have heard how the men, who were here in the cottage yesterday, said that all the water was going to be drained from Takern, and that next year the lake-bottom would be as dry as a house-floor.
And now I wonder where you wild ducks will go."
When Jarro heard this talk he was so furious that he hissed like a snake. "
You are just as mean as a common coot!"
he screamed at Clawina. "
You only want to incite me against human beings.
I don't believe they want to do anything of the sort.
They must know that Takern is the wild ducks' property.
Why should they make so many birds homeless and unhappy?
You have certainly hit upon all this to scare me.
I hope that you may be torn in pieces by Gorgo, the eagle!
I hope that my mistress will chop off your whiskers!"
But Jarro couldn't shut Clawina up with this outburst.
"So you think I'm lying," said she.
"Ask Caesar, then!
He was also in the house last night.
Caesar never lies."
"Caesar," said Jarro, "you understand human speech much better than Clawina. Say that she hasn't heard aright! Think how it would be if the people drained Takern, and changed the lake-bottom into fields!
Then there would be no more pondweed or duck-food for the grown wild ducks, and no blackfish or worms or gnat-eggs for the ducklings.
Then the reed-banks would disappear - where now the ducklings conceal themselves until they are able to fly.
All ducks would be compelled to move away from here and seek another home.
But where shall they find a retreat like Takern?
Caesar, say that Clawina has not heard aright!"
It was extraordinary to watch Caesar's behaviour during this conversation.
He had been wide-awake the whole time before, but now, when Jarro turned to him, he panted, laid his long nose on his forepaws, and was sound asleep within the wink of an eyelid.
The cat looked down at Caesar with a knowing smile. "I believe that Caesar doesn't care to answer you," she said to Jarro. "It is with him as with all dogs; they will never acknowledge that humans can do any wrong.
But you can rely upon my word, at any rate.
I shall tell you why they wish to drain the lake just now.
As long as you wild ducks still had the power on Takern, they did not wish to drain it, for, at least, they got some good out of you; but now, grebes and coots and other birds who are no good as food, have infested nearly all the reed-banks, and the people don't think they need let the lake remain on their account."
Jarro didn't trouble himself to answer Clawina, but raised his head, and shouted in Caesar's ear: "Caesar!
You know that on Takern there are still so many ducks left that they fill the air like clouds.
Say it isn't true that human beings intend to make all of these homeless!"
Then Caesar sprang up with such a sudden outburst at Clawina that she had to save herself by jumping up on a shelf. "I'll teach you to keep quiet when I want to sleep," bawled Caesar.
"Of course I know that there is some talk about draining the lake this year.
But there's been talk of this many times before without anything coming of it.
And that draining business is a matter in which I take no stock whatever.
For how would it go with the game if Takern were laid waste.
You're a donkey to gloat over a thing like that.
What will you and I have to amuse ourselves with, when there are no more birds on Takern?"
THE DECOY-DUCK
Sunday, April seventeenth.
A couple of days later Jarro was so well that he could fly all about the house. Then he was petted a good deal by the mistress, and the little boy ran out in the yard and plucked the first grass-blades for him which had sprung up.
When the mistress caressed him, Jarro thought that, although he was now so strong that he could fly down to Takern at any time, he shouldn't care to be separated from the human beings.
He had no objection to remaining with them all his life.
But early one morning the mistress placed a halter, or noose, over Jarro, which prevented him from using his wings, and then she turned him over to the farm-hand who had found him in the yard.
The farm-hand poked him under his arm, and went down to Takern with him.
The ice had melted away while Jarro had been ill. The old, dry fall leaves still stood along the shores and islets, but all the water-growths had begun to take root down in the deep; and the green stems had already reached the surface.
And now nearly all the migratory birds were at home.
The curlews' hooked bills peeped out from the reeds.
The grebes glided about with new feather-collars around the neck; and the jack-snipes were gathering straws for their nests.
The farm-hand got into a scow, laid Jarro in the bottom of the boat, and began to pole himself out on the lake.
Jarro, who had now accustomed himself to expect only good of human beings, said to Caesar, who was also in the party, that he was very grateful toward the farm-hand for taking him out on the lake.
But there was no need to keep him so closely guarded, for he did not intend to fly away.
To this Caesar made no reply.
He was very close-mouthed that morning.
The only thing which struck Jarro as being a bit peculiar was that the farm-hand had taken his gun along. He couldn't believe that any of the good folk in the cottage would want to shoot birds.
And, beside, Caesar had told him that the people didn't hunt at this time of the year. "
It is a prohibited time," he had said, "although this doesn't concern me, of course."
The farm-hand went over to one of the little reed-enclosed mud-islets. There he stepped from the boat, gathered some old reeds into a pile, and lay down behind it.
Jarro was permitted to wander around on the ground, with the halter over his wings, and tethered to the boat, with a long string.
Suddenly Jarro caught sight of some young ducks and drakes, in whose company he had formerly raced backward and forward over the lake. They were a long way off, but Jarro called them to him with a couple of loud shouts. They responded, and a large and beautiful flock approached.
Before they got there, Jarro began to tell them about his marvellous rescue, and of the kindness of human beings.
Just then, two shots sounded behind him.
Three ducks sank down in the reeds - lifeless - and Caesar bounced out and captured them.
Then Jarro understood. The human beings had only saved him that they might use him as a decoy-duck. And they had also succeeded. Three ducks had died on his account. He thought he should die of shame.
He thought that even his friend Caesar looked contemptuously at him; and when they came home to the cottage, he didn't dare lie down and sleep beside the dog.
The next morning Jarro was again taken out on the shallows. This time, too, he saw some ducks. But when he observed that they flew toward him, he called to them: "Away! Away! Be careful! Fly in another direction! There's a hunter hidden behind the reed-pile. I'm only a decoy-bird!"
And he actually succeeded in preventing them from coming within shooting distance.
Jarro had scarcely had time to taste of a grass-blade, so busy was he in keeping watch. He called out his warning as soon as a bird drew nigh. He even warned the grebes, although he detested them because they crowded the ducks out of their best hiding-places.
But he did not wish that any bird should meet with misfortune on his account.
And, thanks to Jarro's vigilance, the farm-hand had to go home without firing off a single shot.
Despite this fact, Caesar looked less displeased than on the previous day; and when evening came he took Jarro in his mouth, carried him over to the fireplace, and let him sleep between his forepaws.
Nevertheless Jarro was no longer contented in the cottage, but was grievously unhappy.
His heart suffered at the thought that humans never had loved him.
When the mistress, or the little boy, came forward to caress him, he stuck his bill under his wing and pretended that he slept.
For several days Jarro continued his distressful watch-service; and already he was known all over Takern. Then it happened one morning, while he called as usual: "Have a care, birds! Don't come near me! I'm only a decoy-duck," that a grebe-nest came floating toward the shallows where he was tied.
This was nothing especially remarkable.
It was a nest from the year before; and since grebe-nests are built in such a way that they can move on water like boats, it often happens that they drift out toward the lake.
Still Jarro stood there and stared at the nest, because it came so straight toward the islet that it looked as though someone had steered its course over the water.
As the nest came nearer, Jarro saw that a little human being - the tiniest he had ever seen - sat in the nest and rowed it forward with a pair of sticks. And this little human called to him: "Go as near the water as you can, Jarro, and be ready to fly.
You shall soon be freed."
A few seconds later the grebe-nest lay near land, but the little oarsman did not leave it, but sat huddled up between branches and straw.
Jarro too held himself almost immovable.
He was actually paralysed with fear lest the rescuer should be discovered.
The next thing which occurred was that a flock of wild geese came along. Then Jarro woke up to business, and warned them with loud shrieks; but in spite of this they flew backward and forward over the shallows several times.
They held themselves so high that they were beyond shooting distance; still the farm-hand let himself be tempted to fire a couple of shots at them.
These shots were hardly fired before the little creature ran up on land, drew a tiny knife from its sheath, and, with a couple of quick strokes, cut loose Jarro's halter. "
Now fly away, Jarro, before the man has time to load again!"
cried he, while he himself ran down to the grebe-nest and poled away from the shore.
The hunter had had his gaze fixed upon the geese, and hadn't observed that Jarro had been freed; but Caesar had followed more carefully that which happened; and just as Jarro raised his wings, he dashed forward and grabbed him by the neck.
Jarro cried pitifully; and the boy who had freed him said quietly to Caesar: "If you are just as honourable as you look, surely you cannot wish to force a good bird to sit here and entice others into trouble."
When Caesar heard these words, he grinned viciously with his upper lip, but the next second he dropped Jarro. "Fly, Jarro!" said he. "You are certainly too good to be a decoy-duck.
It wasn't for this that I wanted to keep you here; but because it will be lonely in the cottage without you."
THE LOWERING OF THE LAKE
Wednesday, April twentieth.
It was indeed very lonely in the cottage without Jarro. The dog and the cat found the time long, when they didn't have him to wrangle over; and the housewife missed the glad quacking which he had indulged in every time she entered the house.
But the one who longed most for Jarro, was the little boy, Per Ola.
He was but three years old, and the only child; and in all his life he had never had a playmate like Jarro.
When he heard that Jarro had gone back to Takern and the wild ducks, he couldn't be satisfied with this, but thought constantly of how he should get him back again.
Per Ola had talked a good deal with Jarro while he lay still in his basket, and he was certain that the duck understood him. He begged his mother to take him down to the lake that he might find Jarro, and persuade him to come back to them.
Mother wouldn't listen to this; but the little one didn't give up his plan on that account.
The day after Jarro had disappeared, Per Ola was running about in the yard.
He played by himself as usual, but Caesar lay on the stoop; and when mother let the boy out, she said: "Take care of Per Ola, Caesar!"
Now if all had been as usual, Caesar would also have obeyed the command, and the boy would have been so well guarded that he couldn't have run the least risk. But Caesar was not like himself these days.
He knew that the farmers who lived along Takern had held frequent conferences about the lowering of the lake; and that they had almost settled the matter.
The ducks must leave, and Caesar should nevermore behold a glorious chase.
He was so preoccupied with thoughts of this misfortune, that he did not remember to watch over Per Ola.
And the little one had scarcely been alone in the yard a minute, before he realised that now the right moment was come to go down to Takern and talk with Jarro.
He opened a gate, and wandered down toward the lake on the narrow path which ran along the banks.
As long as he could be seen from the house, he walked slowly; but afterward he increased his pace.
He was very much afraid that mother, or someone else, should call to him that he couldn't go.
He didn't wish to do anything naughty, only to persuade Jarro to come home; but he felt that those at home would not have approved of the undertaking.
When Per Ola came down to the lake-shore, he called Jarro several times. Thereupon he stood for a long time and waited, but no Jarro appeared.
He saw several birds that resembled the wild duck, but they flew by without noticing him, and he could understand that none among them was the right one.
When Jarro didn't come to him, the little boy thought that it would be easier to find him if he went out on the lake. There were several good craft lying along the shore, but they were tied.
The only one that lay loose, and at liberty, was an old leaky scow which was so unfit that no one thought of using it.
But Per Ola scrambled up in it without caring that the whole bottom was filled with water.
He had not strength enough to use the oars, but instead, he seated himself to swing and rock in the scow.
Certainly no grown person would have succeeded in moving a scow out on Takern in that manner; but when the tide is high - and ill-luck to the fore - little children have a marvellous faculty for getting out to sea.
Per Ola was soon riding around on Takern, and calling for Jarro.
When the old scow was rocked like this - out to sea - its Cracks opened wider and wider, and the water actually streamed into it. Per Ola didn't pay the slightest attention to this.
He sat upon the little bench in front and called to every bird he saw, and wondered why Jarro didn't appear.
At last Jarro caught sight of Per Ola. He heard that someone called him by the name which he had borne among human beings, and he understood that the boy had gone out on Takern to search for him.
Jarro was unspeakably happy to find that one of the humans really loved him.
He shot down toward Per Ola, like an arrow, seated himself beside him, and let him caress him.
They were both very happy to see each other again.
But suddenly Jarro noticed the condition of the scow.
It was half-filled with water, and was almost ready to sink.
Jarro tried to tell Per Ola that he, who could neither fly nor swim, must try to get upon land; but Per Ola didn't understand him.
Then Jarro did not wait an instant, but hurried away to get help.
Jarro came back in a little while, and carried on his back a tiny thing, who was much smaller than Per Ola himself. If he hadn't been able to talk and move, the boy would have believed that it was a doll.
Instantly, the little one ordered Per Ola to pick up a long, slender pole that lay in the bottom of the scow, and try to pole it toward one of the reed-islands.
Per Ola obeyed him, and he and the tiny creature, together, steered the scow.
With a couple of strokes they were on a little reed-encircled island, and now Per Ola was told that he must step on land.
And just the very moment that Per Ola set foot on land, the scow was filled with water, and sank to the bottom.
When Per Ola saw this he was sure that father and mother would be very angry with him.
He would have started in to cry if he hadn't found something else to think about soon; namely, a flock of big, gray birds, who lighted on the island.
The little midget took him up to them, and told him their names, and what they said.
And this was so funny that Per Ola forgot everything else.
Meanwhile the folks on the farm had discovered that the boy had disappeared, and had started to search for him. They searched the outhouses, looked in the well, and hunted through the cellar.
Then they went out into the highways and by-paths; wandered to the neighbouring farm to find out if he had strayed over there, and searched for him also down by Takern.
But no matter how much they sought they did not find him.
Caesar, the dog, understood very well that the farmer-folk were looking for Per Ola, but he did nothing to lead them on the right track; instead, he lay still as though the matter didn't concern him.
Later in the day, Per Ola's footprints were discovered down by the boat-landing.
And then came the thought that the old, leaky scow was no longer on the strand.
Then one began to understand how the whole affair had come about.
The farmer and his helpers immediately took out the boats and went in search of the boy. They rowed around on Takern until way late in the evening, without seeing the least shadow of him.
They couldn't help believing that the old scow had gone down, and that the little one lay dead on the lake-bottom.
In the evening, Per Ola's mother hunted around on the strand. Everyone else was convinced that the boy was drowned, but she could not bring herself to believe this. She searched all the while.
She searched between reeds and bulrushes; tramped and tramped on the muddy shore, never thinking of how deep her foot sank, and how wet she had become.
She was unspeakably desperate.
Her heart ached in her breast.
She did not weep, but wrung her hands and called for her child in loud piercing tones.
Round about her she heard swans' and ducks' and curlews' shrieks. She thought that they followed her, and moaned and wailed - they too. "Surely, they, too, must be in trouble, since they moan so," thought she. Then she remembered: these were only birds that she heard complain.
They surely had no worries.
It was strange that they did not quiet down after sunset. But she heard all these uncountable bird-throngs, which lived along Takern, send forth cry upon cry. Several of them followed her wherever she went; others came rustling past on light wings.
All the air was filled with moans and lamentations.
But the anguish which she herself was suffering, opened her heart. She thought that she was not as far removed from all other living creatures as people usually think. She understood much better than ever before, how birds fared.
They had their constant worries for home and children; they, as she.
There was surely not such a great difference between them and her as she had heretofore believed.
Then she happened to think that it was as good as settled that these thousands of swans and ducks and loons would lose their homes here by Takern.
"It will be very hard for them," she thought.
"Where shall they bring up their children now?"
She stood still and mused on this.
It appeared to be an excellent and agreeable accomplishment to change a lake into fields and meadows, but let it be some other lake than Takern; some other lake, which was not the home of so many thousand creatures.
She remembered how on the following day the proposition to lower the lake was to be decided, and she wondered if this was why her little son had been lost - just to-day.
Was it God's meaning that sorrow should come and open her heart - just to-day - before it was too late to avert the cruel act?
She walked rapidly up to the house, and began to talk with her husband about this.
She spoke of the lake, and of the birds, and said that she believed it was God's judgment on them both.
And she soon found that he was of the same opinion.
They already owned a large place, but if the lake-draining was carried into effect, such a goodly portion of the lake-bottom would fall to their share that their property would be nearly doubled.
For this reason they had been more eager for the undertaking than any of the other shore owners.
The others had been worried about expenses, and anxious lest the draining should not prove any more successful this time than it was the last.
Per Ola's father knew in his heart that it was he who had influenced them to undertake the work.
He had exercised all his eloquence, so that he might leave to his son a farm as large again as his father had left to him.
He stood and pondered if God's hand was back of the fact that Takern had taken his son from him on the day before he was to draw up the contract to lay it waste.
The wife didn't have to say many words to him, before he answered: "It may be that God does not want us to interfere with His order.
I'll talk with the others about this to-morrow, and I think we'll conclude that all may remain as it is."
While the farmer-folk were talking this over, Caesar lay before the fire. He raised his head and listened very attentively. When he thought that he was sure of the outcome, he walked up to the mistress, took her by the skirt, and led her to the door. "But Caesar!"
said she, and wanted to break loose. "
Do you know where Per Ola is?"
she exclaimed.
Caesar barked joyfully, and threw himself against the door.
She opened it, and Caesar dashed down toward Takern.
The mistress was so positive he knew where Per Ola was, that she rushed after him.
And no sooner had they reached the shore than they heard a child's cry out on the lake.
Per Ola had had the best day of his life, in company with Thumbietot and the birds; but now he had begun to cry because he was hungry and afraid of the darkness.
And he was glad when father and mother and Caesar came for him.
THE PROPHECY
Friday, April twenty-second.
One night when the boy lay and slept on an island in Takern, he was awakened by oar-strokes.
He had hardly gotten his eyes open before there fell such a dazzling light on them that he began to blink.
At first he couldn't make out what it was that shone so brightly out here on the lake; but he soon saw that a scow with a big burning torch stuck up on a spike, aft, lay near the edge of the reeds.
The red flame from the torch was clearly reflected in the night-dark lake; and the brilliant light must have lured the fish, for round about the flame in the deep a mass of dark specks were seen, that moved continually, and changed places.
There were two old men in the scow. One sat at the oars, and the other stood on a bench in the stern and held in his hand a short spear which was coarsely barbed. The one who rowed was apparently a poor fisherman.
He was small, dried-up and weather-beaten, and wore a thin, threadbare coat.
One could see that he was so used to being out in all sorts of weather that he didn't mind the cold.
The other was well fed and well dressed, and looked like a prosperous and self-complacent farmer.
"Now, stop!"
said the farmer, when they were opposite the island where the boy lay.
At the same time he plunged the spear into the water.
When he drew it out again, a long, fine eel came with it.
"Look at that!"
said he as he released the eel from the spear.
"That was one who was worth while.
Now I think we have so many that we can turn back."
His comrade did not lift the oars, but sat and looked around. "It is lovely out here on the lake to-night," said he. And so it was.
It was absolutely still, so that the entire water-surface lay in undisturbed rest with the exception of the streak where the boat had gone forward.
This lay like a path of gold, and shimmered in the firelight.
The sky was clear and dark blue and thickly studded with stars.
The shores were hidden by the reed islands except toward the west.
There Mount Omberg loomed up high and dark, much more impressive than usual, and, cut away a big, three-cornered piece of the vaulted heavens.
The other one turned his head to get the light out of his eyes, and looked about him. "Yes, it is lovely here in Östergylln," said he. "Still the best thing about the province is not its beauty." "Then what is it that's best?" asked the oarsman.
"That it has always been a respected and honoured province." "
That may be true enough." "
And then this, that one knows it will always continue to be so." "
But how in the world can one know this?"
said the one who sat at the oars.
The farmer straightened up where he stood and braced himself with the spear. "There is an old story which has been handed down from father to son in my family; and in it one learns what will happen to Östergötland."
"Then you may as well tell it to me," said the oarsman. "
We do not tell it to anyone and everyone, but I do not wish to keep it a secret from an old comrade.
"At Ulvåsa, here in Östergötland," he continued (and one could tell by the tone of his voice that he talked of something which he had heard from others, and knew by heart), "many, many years ago, there lived a lady who had the gift of looking into the future, and telling people what was going to happen to them - just as certainly and accurately as though it had already occurred.
For this she became widely noted; and it is easy to understand that people would come to her, both from far and near, to find out what they were going to pass through of good or evil.
"One day, when Ulvåsa-lady sat in her hall and spun, as was customary in former days, a poor peasant came into the room and seated himself on the bench near the door.
"'I wonder what you are sitting and thinking about, dear lady,' said the peasant after a little.
"'I am sitting and thinking about high and holy things,' answered she.
'Then it is not fitting, perhaps, that I ask you about something which weighs on my heart,' said the peasant.
"'It is probably nothing else that weighs on your heart than that you may reap much grain on your field. But I am accustomed to receive communications from the Emperor about how it will go with his crown; and from the Pope, about how it will go with his keys.'
'Such things cannot be easy to answer,' said the peasant. '
I have also heard that no one seems to go from here without being dissatisfied with what he has heard.'
"When the peasant said this, he saw that Ulvåsa-lady bit her lip, and moved higher up on the bench. 'So this is what you have heard about me,' said she.
'Then you may as well tempt fortune by asking me about the thing you wish to know; and you shall see if I can answer so that you will be satisfied.'
"After this the peasant did not hesitate to state his errand. He said that he had come to ask how it would go with &#214;sterg&#246;tland in the future.
There was nothing which was so dear to him as his native province, and he felt that he should be happy until his dying day if he could get a satisfactory reply to his query.
"'Oh!
is that all you wish to know,' said the wise lady; 'then I think that you will be content.
For here where I now sit, I can tell you that it will be like this with &#214;sterg&#246;tland: it will always have something to boast of ahead of other provinces.'
"'Yes, that was a good answer, dear lady,' said the peasant, 'and now I would be entirely at peace if I could only comprehend how such a thing should be possible.'
"'Why should it not be possible?' said Ulv&#229;sa-lady. 'Don't you know that &#214;sterg&#246;tland is already renowned?
Or think you there is any place in Sweden that can boast of owning, at the same time, two such cloisters as the ones in Alvastra and Vreta, and such a beautiful cathedral as the one in Link&#246;ping?'
"'That may be so,' said the peasant.
'But I'm an old man, and I know that people's minds are changeable.
I fear that there will come a time when they won't want to give us any glory, either for Alvastra or Vreta or for the cathedral.'
"'Herein you may be right,' said Ulv&#229;sa-lady, 'but you need not doubt prophecy on that account. I shall now build up a new cloister on Vadstena, and that will become the most celebrated in the North.
Thither both the high and the lowly shall make pilgrimages, and all shall sing the praises of the province because it has such a holy place within its confines.'
"The peasant replied that he was right glad to know this.
But he also knew, of course, that everything was perishable; and he wondered much what would give distinction to the province, if Vadstena Cloister should once fall into disrepute.
"'You are not easy to satisfy,' said Ulv&#229;sa-lady, 'but surely I can see so far ahead that I can tell you, before Vadstena Cloister shall have lost its splendour, there will be a castle erected close by, which will be the most magnificent of its period.
Kings and dukes will be guests there, and it shall be accounted an honour to the whole province, that it owns such an ornament.'
"'This I am also glad to hear,' said the peasant.
'But I'm an old man, and I know how it generally turns out with this world's glories.
And if the castle goes to ruin, I wonder much what there will be that can attract the people's attention to this province.'
"'It's not a little that you want to know,' said Ulv&#229;sa-lady, 'but, certainly, I can look far enough into the future to see that there will be life and movement in the forests around Finsp&#229;ng.
I see how cabins and smithies arise there, and I believe that the whole province shall be renowned because iron will be moulded within its confines.'
"The peasant didn't deny that he was delighted to hear this.
'But if it should go so badly that even Finsp&#229;ng's foundry went down in importance, then it would hardly be possible that any new thing could arise of which &#214;sterg&#246;tland might boast.'
"'You are not easy to please,' said Ulv&#229;sa-lady, 'but I can see so far into the future that I mark how, along the lake-shores, great manors&#8212;large as castles&#8212;are built by gentlemen who have carried on wars in foreign lands.
I believe that the manors will bring the province just as much honour as anything else that I have mentioned.'
"'But if there comes a time when no one lauds the great manors?'
insisted the peasant.
"'You need not be uneasy at all events,' said Ulv&#229;sa-lady.
I see how health-springs bubble on Medevi meadows, by V&#228;tter's shores.
I believe that the wells at Medevi will bring the land as much praise as you can desire.'
"'That is a mighty good thing to know,' said the peasant.
'But if there comes a time when people will seek their health at other springs?'
"'You must not give yourself any anxiety on that account,' answered Ulv&#229;sa-lady.
I see how people dig and labour, from Motala to Mem.
They dig a canal right through the country, and then &#214;sterg&#246;tland's praise is again on everyone's lips.'
"But, nevertheless, the peasant looked distraught.
"'I see that the rapids in Motala stream begin to draw wheels,' said Ulv&#229;sa-lady&#8212;and now two bright red spots came to her cheeks, for she began to be impatient&#8212;'I hear hammers resound in Motala, and looms clatter in Norrk&#246;ping.'
"'Yes, that's good to know,' said the peasant, 'but everything is perishable, and I'm afraid that even this can be forgotten, and go into oblivion.'
"When the peasant was not satisfied even now, there was an end to the lady's patience.
'You say that everything is perishable,' said she, 'but now I shall still name something which will always be like itself; and that is that such arrogant and pig-headed peasants as you will always be found in this province&#8212;until the end of time.'
"Hardly had Ulv&#229;sa-lady said this before the peasant rose&#8212;happy and satisfied&#8212;and thanked her for a good answer.
Now, at last, he was satisfied, he said.
"'Verily, I understand now how you look at it,' then said Ulv&#229;sa-lady.
"'Well, I look at it in this way, dear lady,' said the peasant, 'that everything which kings and priests and noblemen and merchants build and accomplish, can only endure for a few years.
But when you tell me that in &#214;sterg&#246;tland there will always be peasants who are honour-loving and persevering, then I know also that it will be able to keep its ancient glory.
For it is only those who go bent under the eternal labour with the soil, who can hold this land in good repute and honour&#8212;from one time to another.'"
Saturday, April twenty-third.
The boy rode forward - way up in the air. He had the great Östergötland plain under him, and sat and counted the many white churches which towered above the small leafy groves around them. It wasn't long before he had counted fifty.
After that he became confused and couldn't keep track of the counting.
Nearly all the farms were built up with large, whitewashed two-story houses, which looked so imposing that the boy couldn't help admiring them.
"There can't be any peasants in this land," he said to himself, "since I do not see any peasant farms."
Immediately all the wild geese shrieked: "Here the peasants live like gentlemen.
Here the peasants live like gentlemen."
On the plains the ice and snow had disappeared, and the spring work had begun.
"What kind of long crabs are those that creep over the fields?"
asked the boy after a bit.
"Ploughs and oxen.
Ploughs and oxen," answered the wild geese.
The oxen moved so slowly down on the fields, that one could scarcely perceive they were in motion, and the geese shouted to them: "You won't get there before next year. You won't get there before next year." But the oxen were equal to the occasion.
They raised their muzzles in the air and bellowed: "We do more good in an hour than such as you do in a whole lifetime."
In a few places the ploughs were drawn by horses. They went along with much more eagerness and haste than the oxen; but the geese couldn't keep from teasing these either. "Ar'n't you ashamed to be doing ox-duty?" cried the wild geese.
"Ar'n't you ashamed yourselves to be doing lazy man's duty?"
the horses neighed back at them.
But while horses and oxen were at work in the fields, the stable ram walked about in the barnyard.
He was newly clipped and touchy, knocked over the small boys, chased the shepherd dog into his kennel, and then strutted about as though he alone were lord of the whole place. "
Rammie, rammie, what have you done with your wool?"
asked the wild geese, who rode by up in the air. "
That I have sent to Drag's woollen mills in Norrköping," replied the ram with a long, drawn-out bleat. "
Rammie, rammie, what have you done with your horns?"
asked the geese.
But any horns the rammie had never possessed, to his sorrow, and one couldn't offer him a greater insult than to ask after them.
He ran around a long time, and butted at the air, so furious was he.
On the country road came a man who drove a flock of Skåne pigs that were not more than a few weeks old, and were going to be sold up country. They trotted along bravely, as little as they were, and kept close together - as if they sought protection.
"Nuff, nuff, nuff, we came away too soon from father and mother.
Nuff, nuff, nuff, how will it go with us poor children?"
said the little pigs.
The wild geese didn't have the heart to tease such poor little creatures.
"It will be better for you than you can ever believe," they cried as they flew past them.
The wild geese were never so merry as when they flew over a flat country.
Then they did not hurry themselves, but flew from farm to farm, and joked with the tame animals.
As the boy rode over the plain, he happened to think of a legend which he had heard a long time ago. He didn't remember it exactly, but it was something about a petticoat - half of which was made of gold-woven velvet, and half of gray homespun cloth.
But the one who owned the petticoat adorned the homespun cloth with such a lot of pearls and precious stones that it looked richer and more gorgeous than the gold-cloth.
He remembered this about the homespun cloth, as he looked down on Östergötland, because it was made up of a large plain, which lay wedged in between two mountainous forest-tracts - one to the north, the other to the south.
The two forest-heights lay there, a lovely blue, and shimmered in the morning light, as if they were decked with golden veils; and the plain, which simply spread out one winter-naked field after another, was, in and of itself, prettier to look upon than gray homespun.
But the people must have been contented on the plain, because it was generous and kind, and they had tried to decorate it in the best way possible.
High up - where the boy rode by - he thought that cities and farms, churches and factories, castles and railway stations were scattered over it, like large and small trinkets.
It shone on the roofs, and the window-panes glittered like jewels.
Yellow country roads, shining railway-tracks and blue canals ran along between the districts like embroidered loops.
Linköping lay around its cathedral like a pearl-setting around a precious stone; and the gardens in the country were like little brooches and buttons.
There was not much regulation in the pattern, but it was a display of grandeur which one could never tire of looking at.
The geese had left Öberg district, and travelled toward the east along Göta Canal. This was also getting itself ready for the summer. Workmen laid canal-banks, and tarred the huge lock-gates. They were working everywhere to receive spring fittingly, even in the cities.
There, masons and painters stood on scaffoldings and made fine the exteriors of the houses while maids were cleaning the windows.
Down at the harbour, sailboats and steamers were being washed and dressed up.
At Norrköping the wild geese left the plain, and flew up toward Kolmården. For a time they had followed an old, hilly country road, which wound around cliffs, and ran forward under wild mountain-walls - when the boy suddenly let out a shriek.
He had been sitting and swinging his foot back and forth, and one of his wooden shoes had slipped off.
"Goosey-gander, goosey-gander, I have dropped my shoe!" cried the boy. The goosey-gander turned about and sank toward the ground; then the boy saw that two children, who were walking along the road, had picked up his shoe. "Goosey-gander, goosey-gander," screamed the boy excitedly, "fly upward again! It is too late.
I cannot get my shoe back again."
Down on the road stood Osa, the goose-girl, and her brother, little Mats, looking at a tiny wooden shoe that had fallen from the skies.
Osa, the goose-girl, stood silent a long while, and pondered over the find.
At last she said, slowly and thoughtfully: "Do you remember, little Mats, that when we went past Övid Cloister, we heard that the folks in a farmyard had seen an elf who was dressed in leather breeches, and had wooden shoes on his feet, like any other working man?
And do you recollect when we came to Vittskövle, a girl told us that she had seen a Goa-Nisse with wooden shoes, who flew away on the back of a goose?
And when we ourselves came home to our cabin, little Mats, we saw a goblin who was dressed in the same way, and who also straddled the back of a goose - and flew away.
Maybe it was the same one who rode along on his goose up here in the air and dropped his wooden shoe."
"Yes, it must have been," said little Mats.
They turned the wooden shoe about and examined it carefully - for it isn't every day that one happens across a Goa-Nisse's wooden shoe on the highway.
"Wait, wait, little Mats!"
said Osa, the goose-girl.
"There is something written on one side of it."
"Why, so there is!
but they are such tiny letters."
"Let me see!
It says - it says: 'Nils Holgersson from W.
Vemminghög.'
That's the most wonderful thing I've ever heard!"
said little Mats.
KARR
About twelve years before Nils Holgersson started on his travels with the wild geese there was a manufacturer at Kolmården who wanted to be rid of one of his dogs.
He sent for his game-keeper and said to him that it was impossible to keep the dog because he could not be broken of the habit of chasing all the sheep and fowl he set eyes on, and he asked the man to take the dog into the forest and shoot him.
The game-keeper slipped the leash on the dog to lead him to a spot in the forest where all the superannuated dogs from the manor were shot and buried.
He was not a cruel man, but he was very glad to shoot that dog, for he knew that sheep and chickens were not the only creatures he hunted.
Times without number he had gone into the forest and helped himself to a hare or a grouse-chick.
The dog was a little black-and-tan setter.
His name was Karr, and he was so wise he understood all that was said.
As the game-keeper was leading him through the thickets, Karr knew only too well what was in store for him.
But this no one could have guessed by his behaviour, for he neither hung his head nor dragged his tail, but seemed as unconcerned as ever.
It was because they were in the forest that the dog was so careful not to appear the least bit anxious.
There were great stretches of woodland on every side of the factory, and this forest was famed both among animals and human beings because for many, many years the owners had been so careful of it that they had begrudged themselves even the trees needed for firewood.
Nor had they had the heart to thin or train them.
The trees had been allowed to grow as they pleased.
Naturally a forest thus protected was a beloved refuge for wild animals, which were to be found there in great numbers.
Among themselves they called it Liberty Forest, and regarded it as the best retreat in the whole country.
As the dog was being led through the woods he thought of what a bugaboo he had been to all the small animals and birds that lived there.
"Now, Karr, wouldn't they be happy in their lairs if they only knew what was awaiting you?"
he thought, but at the same time he wagged his tail and barked cheerfully, so that no one should think that he was worried or depressed.
"What fun would there have been in living had I not hunted occasionally?"
he reasoned.
"Let him who will, regret; it's not going to be Karr!"
But the instant the dog said this, a singular change came over him.
He stretched his neck as though he had a mind to howl.
He no longer trotted alongside the game-keeper, but walked behind him.
It was plain that he had begun to think of something unpleasant.
It was early summer; the elk cows had just given birth to their young, and, the night before, the dog had succeeded in parting from its mother an elk calf not more than five days old, and had driven it down into the marsh.
There he had chased it back and forth over the knolls - not with the idea of capturing it, but merely for the sport of seeing how he could scare it.
The elk cow knew that the marsh was bottomless so soon after the thaw, and that it could not as yet hold up so large an animal as herself, so she stood on the solid earth for the longest time, watching!
But when Karr kept chasing the calf farther and farther away, she rushed out on the marsh, drove the dog off, took the calf with her, and turned back toward firm land.
Elk are more skilled than other animals in traversing dangerous, marshy ground, and it seemed as if she would reach solid land in safety; but when she was almost there a knoll which she had stepped upon sank into the mire, and she went down with it.
She tried to rise, but could get no secure foothold, so she sank and sank.
Karr stood and looked on, not daring to move.
When he saw that the elk could not save herself, he ran away as fast as he could, for he had begun to think of the beating he would get if it were discovered that he had brought a mother elk to grief.
He was so terrified that he dared not pause for breath until he reached home.
It was this that the dog recalled; and it troubled him in a way very different from the recollection of all his other misdeeds.
This was doubtless because he had not really meant to kill either the elk cow or her calf, but had deprived them of life without wishing to do so.
"But maybe they are alive yet!"
thought the dog.
"They were not dead when I ran away; perhaps they saved themselves."
He was seized with an irresistible longing to know for a certainty while yet there was time for him to find out.
He noticed that the game-keeper did not have a firm hold on the leash; so he made a sudden spring, broke loose, and dashed through the woods down to the marsh with such speed that he was out of sight before the game-keeper had time to level his gun.
There was nothing for the game-keeper to do but to rush after him.
When he got to the marsh he found the dog standing upon a knoll, howling with all his might.
The man thought he had better find out the meaning of this, so he dropped his gun and crawled out over the marsh on hands and knees. He had not gone far when he saw an elk cow lying dead in the quagmire. Close beside her lay a little calf.
It was still alive, but so much exhausted that it could not move.
Karr was standing beside the calf, now bending down and licking it, now howling shrilly for help.
The game-keeper raised the calf and began to drag it toward land.
When the dog understood that the calf would be saved he was wild with joy.
He jumped round and round the game-keeper, licking his hands and barking with delight.
The man carried the baby elk home and shut it up in a calf stall in the cow shed. Then he got help to drag the mother elk from the marsh. Only after this had been done did he remember that he was to shoot Karr.
He called the dog to him, and again took him into the forest.
The game-keeper walked straight on toward the dog's grave; but all the while he seemed to be thinking deeply.
Suddenly he turned and walked toward the manor.
Karr had been trotting along quietly; but when the game-keeper turned and started for home, he became anxious.
The man must have discovered that it was he that had caused the death of the elk, and now he was going back to the manor to be thrashed before he was shot!
To be beaten was worse than all else!
With that prospect Karr could no longer keep up his spirits, but hung his head.
When he came to the manor he did not look up, but pretended that he knew no one there.
The master was standing on the stairs leading to the hall when the game-keeper came forward.
"Where on earth did that dog come from?"
he exclaimed.
"Surely it can't be Karr?
He must be dead this long time!"
Then the man began to tell his master all about the mother elk, while Karr made himself as little as he could, and crouched behind the game-keeper's legs.
Much to his surprise the man had only praise for him.
He said it was plain the dog knew that the elk were in distress, and wished to save them.
"You may do as you like, but I can't shoot that dog!"
declared the game-keeper.
Karr raised himself and pricked up his ears. He could hardly believe that he heard aright. Although he did not want to show how anxious he had been, he couldn't help whining a little.
Could it be possible that his life was to be spared simply because he had felt uneasy about the elk?
The master thought that Karr had conducted himself well, but as he did not want the dog, he could not decide at once what should be done with him.
"If you will take charge of him and answer for his good behaviour in the future, he may as well live," he said, finally.
This the game-keeper was only too glad to do, and that was how Karr came to move to the game-keeper's lodge.
GRAYSKIN'S FLIGHT
From the day that Karr went to live with the game-keeper he abandoned entirely his forbidden chase in the forest. This was due not only to his having been thoroughly frightened, but also to the fact that he did not wish to make the game-keeper angry at him.
Ever since his new master saved his life the dog loved him above everything else.
He thought only of following him and watching over him.
If he left the house, Karr would run ahead to make sure that the way was clear, and if he sat at home, Karr would lie before the door and keep a close watch on every one who came and went.
When all was quiet at the lodge, when no footsteps were heard on the road, and the game-keeper was working in his garden, Karr would amuse himself playing with the baby elk.
At first the dog had no desire to leave his master even for a moment. Since he accompanied him everywhere, he went with him to the cow shed. When he gave the elk calf its milk, the dog would sit outside the stall and gaze at it.
The game-keeper called the calf Grayskin because he thought it did not merit a prettier name, and Karr agreed with him on that point.
Every time the dog looked at it he thought that he had never seen anything so ugly and misshapen as the baby elk, with its long, shambly legs, which hung down from the body like loose stilts.
The head was large, old, and wrinkled, and it always drooped to one side.
The skin lay in tucks and folds, as if the animal had put on a coat that had not been made for him.
Always doleful and discontented, curiously enough he jumped up every time Karr appeared as if glad to see him.
The elk calf became less hopeful from day to day, did not grow any, and at last he could not even rise when he saw Karr.
Then the dog jumped up into the crib to greet him, and thereupon a light kindled in the eyes of the poor creature - as if a cherished longing were fulfilled.
After that Karr visited the elk calf every day, and spent many hours with him, licking his coat, playing and racing with him, till he taught him a little of everything a forest animal should know.
It was remarkable that, from the time Karr began to visit the elk calf in his stall, the latter seemed more contented, and began to grow.
After he was fairly started, he grew so rapidly that in a couple of weeks the stall could no longer hold him, and he had to be moved into a grove.
When he had been in the grove two months his legs were so long that he could step over the fence whenever he wished. Then the lord of the manor gave the game-keeper permission to put up a higher fence and to allow him more space.
Here the elk lived for several years, and grew up into a strong and handsome animal.
Karr kept him company as often as he could; but now it was no longer through pity, for a great friendship had sprung up between the two.
The elk was always inclined to be melancholy, listless, and, indifferent, but Karr knew how to make him playful and happy.
Grayskin had lived for five summers on the game-keeper's place, when his owner received a letter from a zoölogical garden abroad asking if the elk might be purchased.
The master was pleased with the proposal, the game-keeper was distressed, but had not the power to say no; so it was decided that the elk should be sold. Karr soon discovered what was in the air and ran over to the elk to have a chat with him.
The dog was very much distressed at the thought of losing his friend, but the elk took the matter calmly, and seemed neither glad nor sorry.
"Do you think of letting them send you away without offering resistance?"
asked Karr.
"What good would it do to resist?"
asked Grayskin.
"I should prefer to remain where I am, naturally, but if I've been sold, I shall have to go, of course."
Karr looked at Grayskin and measured him with his eyes.
It was apparent that the elk was not yet full grown.
He did not have the broad antlers, high hump, and long mane of the mature elk; but he certainly had strength enough to fight for his freedom.
"One can see that he has been in captivity all his life," thought Karr, but said nothing.
Karr left and did not return to the grove till long past midnight.
By that time he knew Grayskin would be awake and eating his breakfast.
"Of course you are doing right, Grayskin, in letting them take you away," remarked Karr, who appeared now to be calm and satisfied. "You will be a prisoner in a large park and will have no responsibilities.
It seems a pity that you must leave here without having seen the forest.
You know your ancestors have a saying that 'the elk are one with the forest.'
But you haven't even been in a forest!"
Grayskin glanced up from the clover which he stood munching.
"Indeed, I should love to see the forest, but how am I to get over the fence?"
he said with his usual apathy.
"Oh, that is difficult for one who has such short legs!"
said Karr.
The elk glanced slyly at the dog, who jumped the fence many times a day - little as he was.
He walked over to the fence, and with one spring he was on the other side, without knowing how it happened.
Then Karr and Grayskin went into the forest.
It was a beautiful moonlight night in late summer; but in among the trees it was dark, and the elk walked along slowly.
"Perhaps we had better turn back," said Karr.
"You, who have never before tramped the wild forest, might easily break your legs."
Grayskin moved more rapidly and with more courage.
Karr conducted the elk to a part of the forest where the pines grew so thickly that no wind could penetrate them.
"It is here that your kind are in the habit of seeking shelter from cold and storm," said Karr. "Here they stand under the open skies all winter.
But you will fare much better where you are going, for you will stand in a shed, with a roof over your head, like an ox."
Grayskin made no comment, but stood quietly and drank in the strong, piney air.
"Have you anything more to show me, or have I now seen the whole forest?"
he asked.
Then Karr went with him to a big marsh, and showed him clods and quagmire.
"Over this marsh the elk take flight when they are in peril," said Karr. "I don't know how they manage it, but, large and heavy as they are, they can walk here without sinking.
Of course you couldn't hold yourself up on such dangerous ground, but then there is no occasion for you to do so, for you will never be hounded by hunters."
Grayskin made no retort, but with a leap he was out on the marsh, and happy when he felt how the clods rocked under him.
He dashed across the marsh, and came back again to Karr, without having stepped into a mudhole.
"Have we seen the whole forest now?"
he asked.
"No, not yet," said Karr.
He next conducted the elk to the skirt of the forest, where fine oaks, lindens, and aspens grew.
"Here your kind eat leaves and bark, which they consider the choicest of food; but you will probably get better fare abroad."
Grayskin was astonished when he saw the enormous leaf-trees spreading like a great canopy above him.
He ate both oak leaves and aspen bark.
"These taste deliciously bitter and good!"
he remarked.
"Better than clover!"
"Then wasn't it well that you should taste them once?"
said the dog.
Thereupon he took the elk down to a little forest lake.
The water was as smooth as a mirror, and reflected the shores, which were veiled in thin, light mists.
When Grayskin saw the lake he stood entranced.
"What is this, Karr?"
he asked.
It was the first time that he had seen a lake.
"It's a large body of water - a lake," said Karr.
"Your people swim across it from shore to shore.
One could hardly expect you to be familiar with this; but at least you should go in and take a swim!"
Karr, himself, plunged into the water for a swim. Grayskin stayed back on the shore for some little time, but finally followed. He grew breathless with delight as the cool water stole soothingly around his body. He wanted it over his back, too, so went farther out.
Then he felt that the water could hold him up, and began to swim.
He swam all around Karr, ducking and snorting, perfectly at home in the water.
When they were on shore again, the dog asked if they had not better go home now.
"It's a long time until morning," observed Grayskin, "so we can tramp around in the forest a little longer."
They went again into the pine wood. Presently they came to an open glade illuminated by the moonlight, where grass and flowers shimmered beneath the dew. Some large animals were grazing on this forest meadow - an elk bull, several elk cows and a number of elk calves.
When Grayskin caught sight of them he stopped short.
He hardly glanced at the cows or the young ones, but stared at the old bull, which had broad antlers with many taglets, a high hump, and a long-haired fur piece hanging down from his throat.
"What kind of an animal is that?"
asked Grayskin in wonderment.
"He is called Antler-Crown," said Karr, "and he is your kinsman.
One of these days you, too, will have broad antlers, like those, and just such a mane; and if you were to remain in the forest, very likely you, also, would have a herd to lead."
"If he is my kinsman, I must go closer and have a look at him," said Grayskin.
"I never dreamed that an animal could be so stately!"
Grayskin walked over to the elk, but almost immediately he came back to Karr, who had remained at the edge of the clearing.
"You were not very well received, were you?"
said Karr.
"I told him that this was the first time I had run across any of my kinsmen, and asked if I might walk with them on their meadow.
But they drove me back, threatening me with their antlers."
"You did right to retreat," said Karr. "A young elk bull with only a taglet crown must be careful about fighting with an old elk.
Another would have disgraced his name in the whole forest by retreating without resistance, but such things needn't worry you who are going to move to a foreign land."
Karr had barely finished speaking when Grayskin turned and walked down to the meadow. The old elk came toward him, and instantly they began to fight. Their antlers met and clashed, and Grayskin was driven backward over the whole meadow.
Apparently he did not know how to make use of his strength; but when he came to the edge of the forest, he planted his feet on the ground, pushed hard with his antlers, and began to force Antler-Crown back.
Grayskin fought quietly, while Antler-Crown puffed and snorted.
The old elk, in his turn, was now being forced backward over the meadow.
Suddenly a loud crash was heard!
A taglet in the old elk's antlers had snapped.
He tore himself loose, and dashed into the forest.
Karr was still standing at the forest border when Grayskin came along.
"Now that you have seen what there is in the forest," said Karr, "will you come home with me?"
"Yes, it's about time," observed the elk.
Both were silent on the way home. Karr sighed several times, as if he was disappointed about something; but Grayskin stepped along - his head in the air - and seemed delighted over the adventure. He walked ahead unhesitatingly until they came to the enclosure. There he paused.
He looked in at the narrow pen where he had lived up till now; saw the beaten ground, the stale fodder, the little trough where he had drunk water, and the dark shed in which he had slept.
"The elk are one with the forest!"
he cried.
Then he threw back his head, so that his neck rested against his back, and rushed wildly into the woods.
HELPLESS, THE WATER-SNAKE
In a pine thicket in the heart of Liberty Forest, every year, in the month of August, there appeared a few grayish-white moths of the kind which are called nun moths. They were small and few in number, and scarcely any one noticed them.
When they had fluttered about in the depth of the forest a couple of nights, they laid a few thousand eggs on the branches of trees; and shortly afterward dropped lifeless to the ground.
When spring came, little prickly caterpillars crawled out from the eggs and began to eat the pine needles. They had good appetites, but they never seemed to do the trees any serious harm, because they were hotly pursued by birds.
It was seldom that more than a few hundred caterpillars escaped the pursuers.
The poor things that lived to be full grown crawled up on the branches, spun white webs around themselves, and sat for a couple of weeks as motionless pupae. During this period, as a rule, more than half of them were abducted.
If a hundred nun moths came forth in August, winged and perfect, it was reckoned a good year for them.
This sort of uncertain and obscure existence did the moths lead for many years in Liberty Forest.
There were no insect folk in the whole country that were so scarce, and they would have remained quite harmless and powerless had they not, most unexpectedly, received a helper.
This fact has some connection with Grayskin's flight from the game-keeper's paddock. Grayskin roamed the forest that he might become more familiar with the place.
Late in the afternoon he happened to squeeze through some thickets behind a clearing where the soil was muddy and slimy, and in the centre of it was a murky pool.
This open space was encircled by tall pines almost bare from age and miasmic air.
Grayskin was displeased with the place and would have left it at once had he not caught sight of some bright green calla leaves which grew near the pool.
As he bent his head toward the calla stalks, he happened to disturb a big black snake, which lay sleeping under them. Grayskin had heard Karr speak of the poisonous adders that were to be found in the forest.
So, when the snake raised its head, shot out its tongue and hissed at him, he thought he had encountered an awfully dangerous reptile.
He was terrified and, raising his foot, he struck so hard with his hoof that he crushed the snake's head.
Then, away he ran in hot haste!
As soon as Grayskin had gone, another snake, just as long and as black as the first, came up from the pool.
It crawled over to the dead one, and licked the poor, crushed-in head.
"Can it be true that you are dead, old Harmless?" hissed the snake.
"We two have lived together so many years; we two have been so happy with each other, and have fared so well here in the swamp, that we have lived to be older than all the other water-snakes in the forest!
This is the worst sorrow that could have befallen me!"
The snake was so broken-hearted that his long body writhed as if it had been wounded.
Even the frogs, who lived in constant fear of him, were sorry for him.
"What a wicked creature he must be to murder a poor water-snake that cannot defend itself!" hissed the snake. "He certainly deserves a severe punishment. As sure as my name is Helpless and I'm the oldest water-snake in the whole forest, I'll be avenged!
I shall not rest until that elk lies as dead on the ground as my poor old snake-wife."
When the snake had made this vow he curled up into a hoop and began to ponder.
One can hardly imagine anything that would be more difficult for a poor water-snake than to wreak vengeance upon a big, strong elk; and old Helpless pondered day and night without finding any solution.
One night, as he lay there with his vengeance-thoughts, he heard a slight rustle over his head.
He glanced up and saw a few light nun moths playing in among the trees.
He followed them with his eyes a long while; then began to hiss loudly to himself, apparently pleased with the thought that had occurred to him - then he fell asleep.
The next morning the water-snake went over to see Crawlie, the adder, who lived in a stony and hilly part of Liberty Forest. He told him all about the death of the old water-snake, and begged that he who could deal such deadly thrusts would undertake the work of vengeance.
But Crawlie was not exactly disposed to go to war with an elk.
"If I were to attack an elk," said the adder, "he would instantly kill me.
Old Harmless is dead and gone, and we can't bring her back to life, so why should I rush into danger on her account?"
When the water-snake got this reply he raised his head a whole foot from the ground, and hissed furiously:
"Vish vash!
Vish vash!"
he said.
"It's a pity that you, who have been blessed with such weapons of defence, should be so cowardly that you don't dare use them!"
When the adder heard this, he, too, got angry.
"Crawl away, old Helpless!"
he hissed.
"The poison is in my fangs, but I would rather spare one who is said to be my kinsman."
But the water-snake did not move from the spot, and for a long time the snakes lay there hissing abusive epithets at each other.
When Crawlie was so angry that he couldn't hiss, but could only dart his tongue out, the water-snake changed the subject, and began to talk in a very different tone.
"I had still another errand, Crawlie," he said, lowering his voice to a mild whisper.
"But now I suppose you are so angry that you wouldn't care to help me?"
"If you don't ask anything foolish of me, I shall certainly be at your service."
"In the pine trees down by the swamp live a moth folk that fly around all night."
"I know all about them," remarked Crawlie.
"What's up with them now?"
"They are the smallest insect family in the forest," said Helpless, "and the most harmless, since the caterpillars content themselves with gnawing only pine needles."
"Yes, I know," said Crawlie.
"I'm afraid those moths will soon be exterminated," sighed the water-snake.
"There are so many who pick off the caterpillars in the spring."
Now Crawlie began to understand that the water-snake wanted the caterpillars for his own purpose, and he answered pleasantly:
"Do you wish me to say to the owls that they are to leave those pine tree worms in peace?"
"Yes, it would be well if you who have some authority in the forest should do this," said Helpless.
"I might also drop a good word for the pine needle pickers among the thrushes?"
volunteered the adder.
"I will gladly serve you when you do not demand anything unreasonable."
"Now you have given me a good promise, Crawlie," said Helpless, "and I'm glad that I came to you."
THE NUN MOTHS
One morning - several years later - Karr lay asleep on the porch.
It was in the early summer, the season of light nights, and it was as bright as day, although the sun was not yet up.
Karr was awakened by some one calling his name.
"Is it you, Grayskin?"
he asked, for he was accustomed to the elk's nightly visits.
Again he heard the call; then he recognized Grayskin's voice, and hastened in the direction of the sound.
Karr heard the elk's footfalls in the distance, as he dashed into the thickest pine wood, and straight through the brush, following no trodden path. Karr could not catch up with him, and he had great difficulty in even following the trail.
"Karr, Karri" came the cry, and the voice was certainly Grayskin's, although it had a ring now which the dog had never heard before.
"I'm coming, I'm coming!"
the dog responded.
"Where are you?"
"Karr, Karr!
Don't you see how it falls and falls?"
said Grayskin.
Then Karr noticed that the pine needles kept dropping and dropping from the trees, like a steady fall of rain.
"Yes, I see how it falls," he cried, and ran far into the forest in search of the elk.
Grayskin kept running through the thickets, while Karr was about to lose the trail again.
"Karr, Karr!"
roared Grayskin; "can't you scent that peculiar odour in the forest?"
Karr stopped and sniffed.
He had not thought of it before, but now he remarked that the pines sent forth a much stronger odour than usual.
"Yes, I catch the scent," he said.
He did not stop long enough to find out the cause of it, but hurried on after Grayskin.
The elk ran ahead with such speed that the dog could not catch up with him.
"Karr, Karr!"
he called; "can't you hear the crunching on the pines?"
Now his tone was so plaintive it would have melted a stone.
Karr paused to listen.
He heard a faint but distinct "tap, tap," on the trees.
It sounded like the ticking of a watch.
"Yes, I hear how it ticks," cried Karr, and ran no farther.
He understood that the elk did not want him to follow, but to take notice of something that was happening in the forest.
Karr was standing beneath the drooping branches of a great pine. He looked carefully at it; the needles moved. He went closer and saw a mass of grayish-white caterpillars creeping along the branches, gnawing off the needles. Every branch was covered with them.
The crunch, crunch in the trees came from the working of their busy little jaws.
Gnawed-off needles fell to the ground in a continuous shower, and from the poor pines there came such a strong odour that the dog suffered from it.
"What can be the meaning of this?"
wondered Karr.
"It's too bad about the pretty trees!
Soon they'll have no beauty left."
He walked from tree to tree, trying with his poor eyesight to see if all was well with them.
"There's a pine they haven't touched," he thought.
But they had taken possession of it, too.
"And here's a birch - no, this also!
The game-keeper will not be pleased with this," observed Karr.
He ran deeper into the thickets, to learn how far the destruction had spread. Wherever he went, he heard the same ticking; scented the same odour; saw the same needle rain. There was no need of his pausing to investigate. He understood it all by these signs.
The little caterpillars were everywhere.
The whole forest was being ravaged by them!
All of a sudden he came to a tract where there was no odour, and where all was still.
"Here's the end of their domain," thought the dog, as he paused and glanced about.
But here it was even worse; for the caterpillars had already done their work, and the trees were needleless.
They were like the dead.
The only thing that covered them was a network of ragged threads, which the caterpillars had spun to use as roads and bridges.
In there, among the dying trees, Grayskin stood waiting for Karr.
He was not alone. With him were four old elk - the most respected in the forest.
Karr knew them: They were Crooked-Back, who was a small elk, but had a larger hump than the others; Antler-Crown, who was the most dignified of the elk; Rough-Mane, with the thick coat; and an old long-legged one, who, up till the autumn before, when he got a bullet in his thigh, had been terribly hot-tempered and quarrelsome.
"What in the world is happening to the forest?"
Karr asked when he came up to the elk.
They stood with lowered heads, far protruding upper lips, and looked puzzled.
"No one can tell," answered Grayskin. "This insect family used to be the least hurtful of any in the forest, and never before have they done any damage.
But these last few years they have been multiplying so fast that now it appears as if the entire forest would be destroyed."
"Yes, it looks bad," Karr agreed, "but I see that the wisest animals in the forest have come together to hold a consultation.
Perhaps you have already found some remedy?"
When the dog said this, Crooked-Back solemnly raised his heavy head, pricked up his long ears, and spoke:
"We have summoned you hither, Karr, that we may learn if the humans know of this desolation."
"No," said Karr, "no human being ever comes thus far into the forest when it's not hunting time.
They know nothing of this misfortune."
Then Antler-Crown said:
"We who have lived long in the forest do not think that we can fight this insect pest all by ourselves."
"After this there will be no peace in the forest!"
put in Rough-Mane.
"But we can't let the whole Liberty Forest go to rack and ruin!"
protested Big-and-Strong.
"We'll have to consult the humans; there is no alternative."
Karr understood that the elk had difficulty in expressing what they wished to say, and he tried to help them.
"Perhaps you want me to let the people know the conditions here?"
he suggested.
All the old elk nodded their heads.
"It's most unfortunate that we are obliged to ask help of human beings, but we have no choice."
A moment later Karr was on his way home.
As he ran ahead, deeply distressed over all that he had heard and seen, a big black water-snake approached them.
"Well met in the forest!"
hissed the water-snake.
"Well met again!"
snarled Karr, and rushed by without stopping.
The snake turned and tried to catch up to him.
"Perhaps that creature also, is worried about the forest," thought Karr, and waited.
Immediately the snake began to talk about the great disaster.
"There will be an end of peace and quiet in the forest when human beings are called hither," said the snake.
"I'm afraid there will," the dog agreed; "but the oldest forest dwellers know what they're about!"
he added.
"I think I know a better plan," said the snake, "if I can get the reward I wish."
"Are you not the one whom every one around here calls old Helpless?"
said the dog, sneeringly.
"I'm an old inhabitant of the forest," said the snake, "and I know how to get rid of such plagues."
"If you clear the forest of that pest, I feel sure you can have anything you ask for," said Karr.
The snake did not respond to this until he had crawled under a tree stump, where he was well protected.
Then he said:
"Tell Grayskin that if he will leave Liberty Forest forever, and go far north, where no oak tree grows, I will send sickness and death to all the creeping things that gnaw the pines and spruces!"
"What's that you say?"
asked Karr, bristling up.
"What harm has Grayskin ever done you?"
"He has slain the one whom I loved best," the snake declared, "and I want to be avenged."
Before the snake had finished speaking, Karr made a dash for him; but the reptile lay safely hidden under the tree stump.
"Stay where you are!"
Karr concluded.
"We'll manage to drive out the caterpillars without your help."
THE BIG WAR OF THE MOTHS
The following spring, as Karr was dashing through the forest one morning, he heard some one behind him calling: "Karr!
Karr!"
He turned and saw an old fox standing outside his lair.
"You must tell me if the humans are doing anything for the forest," said the fox.
"Yes, you may be sure they are!"
said Karr.
"They are working as hard as they can."
"They have killed off all my kinsfolk, and they'll be killing me next," protested the fox.
"But they shall be pardoned for that if only they save the forest."
That year Karr never ran into the woods without some animal's asking if the humans could save the forest. It was not easy for the dog to answer; the people themselves were not certain that they could conquer the moths.
But considering how feared and hated old Kolmården had always been, it was remarkable that every day more than a hundred men went there, to work.
They cleared away the underbrush.
They felled dead trees, lopped off branches from the live ones so that the caterpillars could not easily crawl from tree to tree; they also dug wide trenches around the ravaged parts and put up lime-washed fences to keep them out of new territory.
Then they painted rings of lime around the trunks of trees to prevent the caterpillars leaving those they had already stripped.
The idea was to force them to remain where they were until they starved to death.
The people worked with the forest until far into the spring.
They were hopeful, and could hardly wait for the caterpillars to come out from their eggs, feeling certain that they had shut them in so effectually that most of them would die of starvation.
But in the early summer the caterpillars came out, more numerous than ever.
They were everywhere!
They crawled on the country roads, on fences, on the walls of the cabins.
They wandered outside the confines of Liberty Forest to other parts of Kolmården.
"They won't stop till all our forests are destroyed!"
sighed the people, who were in great despair, and could not enter the forest without weeping.
Karr was so sick of the sight of all these creeping, gnawing things that he could hardly bear to step outside the door. But one day he felt that he must go and find out how Grayskin was getting on.
He took the shortest cut to the elk's haunts, and hurried along - his nose close to the earth.
When he came to the tree stump where he had met Helpless the year before, the snake was still there, and called to him:
"Have you told Grayskin what I said to you when last we met?"
asked the water-snake.
Karr only growled and tried to get at him.
"If you haven't told him, by all means do so!"
insisted the snake.
"You must see that the humans know of no cure for this plague."
"Neither do you!"
retorted the dog, and ran on.
Karr found Grayskin, but the elk was so low-spirited that he scarcely greeted the dog.
He began at once to talk of the forest.
"I don't know what I wouldn't give if this misery were only at an end!"
he said.
"Now I shall tell you that 'tis said you could save the forest."
Then Karr delivered the water-snake's message.
"If any one but Helpless had promised this, I should immediately go into exile," declared the elk.
"But how can a poor water-snake have the power to work such a miracle?"
"Of course it's only a bluff," said Karr.
"Water-snakes always like to pretend that they know more than other creatures."
When Karr was ready to go home, Grayskin accompanied him part of the way.
Presently Karr heard a thrush, perched on a pine top, cry:
"There goes Grayskin, who has destroyed the forest!
There goes Grayskin, who has destroyed the forest!"
Karr thought that he had not heard correctly, but the next moment a hare came darting across the path.
When the hare saw them, he stopped, flapped his ears, and screamed:
"Here comes Grayskin, who has destroyed the forest!"
Then he ran as fast as he could.
"What do they mean by that?"
asked Karr.
"I really don't know," said Grayskin.
"I think that the small forest animals are displeased with me because I was the one who proposed that we should ask help of human beings.
When the underbrush was cut down, all their lairs and hiding places were destroyed."
They walked on together a while longer, and Karr heard the same cry coming from all directions:
"There goes Grayskin, who has destroyed the forest!"
Grayskin pretended not to hear it; but Karr understood why the elk was so downhearted.
"I say, Grayskin, what does the water-snake mean by saying you killed the one he loved best?"
"How can I tell?"
said Grayskin.
"You know very well that I never kill anything."
Shortly after that they met the four old elk - Crooked-Back, Antler-Crown, Rough-Mane, and Big-and-Strong, who were coming along slowly, one after the other.
"Well met in the forest!"
called Grayskin.
"Well met in turn!"
answered the elk.
"We were just looking for you, Grayskin, to consult with you about the forest."
"The fact is," began Crooked-Back, "we have been informed that a crime has been committed here, and that the whole forest is being destroyed because the criminal has not been punished."
"What kind of a crime was it?"
"Some one killed a harmless creature that he couldn't eat.
Such an act is accounted a crime in Liberty Forest."
"Who could have done such a cowardly thing?"
wondered Grayskin.
"They say that an elk did it, and we were just going to ask if you knew who it was."
"No," said Grayskin, "I have never heard of an elk killing a harmless creature."
Grayskin parted from the four old elk, and went on with Karr.
He was silent and walked with lowered head.
They happened to pass Crawlie, the adder, who lay on his shelf of rock.
"There goes Grayskin, who has destroyed the whole forest!"
hissed Crawlie, like all the rest.
By that time Grayskin's patience was exhausted.
He walked up to the snake, and raised a forefoot.
"Do you think of crushing me as you crushed the old water-snake?"
hissed Crawlie.
"Did I kill a water-snake?"
asked Grayskin, astonished.
"The first day you were in the forest you killed the wife of poor old Helpless," said Crawlie.
Grayskin turned quickly from the adder, and continued his walk with Karr.
Suddenly he stopped.
"Karr, it was I who committed that crime!
I killed a harmless creature; therefore it is on my account that the forest is being destroyed."
"What are you saying?"
Karr interrupted.
"You may tell the water-snake, Helpless, that Grayskin goes into exile to-night!"
"That I shall never tell him!"
protested Karr.
"The Far North is a dangerous country for elk."
"Do you think that I wish to remain here, when I have caused a disaster like this?"
protested Grayskin.
"Don't be rash!
Sleep over it before you do anything!"
"It was you who taught me that the elk are one with the forest," said Grayskin, and so saying he parted from Karr.
The dog went home alone; but this talk with Grayskin troubled him, and the next morning he returned to the forest to seek him, but Grayskin was not to be found, and the dog did not search long for him.
He realized that the elk had taken the snake at his word, and had gone into exile.
On his walk home Karr was too unhappy for words!
He could not understand why Grayskin should allow that wretch of a water-snake to trick him away.
He had never heard of such folly!
"What power can that old Helpless have?"
As Karr walked along, his mind full of these thoughts, he happened to see the game-keeper, who stood pointing up at a tree.
"What are you looking at?"
asked a man who stood beside him.
"Sickness has come among the caterpillars," observed the game-keeper.
Karr was astonished, but he was even more angered at the snake's having the power to keep his word.
Grayskin would have to stay away a long long time, for, of course, that water-snake would never die.
At the very height of his grief a thought came to Karr which comforted him a little.
"Perhaps the water-snake won't live so long, after all!"
he thought.
"Surely he cannot always lie protected under a tree root.
As soon as he has cleaned out the caterpillars, I know some one who is going to bite his head off!"
It was true that an illness had made its appearance among the caterpillars. The first summer it did not spread much. It had only just broken out when it was time for the larvae to turn into pupae. From the latter came millions of moths.
They flew around in the trees like a blinding snowstorm, and laid countless numbers of eggs.
An even greater destruction was prophesied for the following year.
The destruction came not only to the forest, but also to the caterpillars.
The sickness spread quickly from forest to forest.
The sick caterpillars stopped eating, crawled up to the branches of the trees, and died there.
There was great rejoicing among the people when they saw them die, but there was even greater rejoicing among the forest animals.
From day to day the dog Karr went about with savage glee, thinking of the hour when he might venture to kill Helpless.
But the caterpillars, meanwhile, had spread over miles of pine woods.
Not in one summer did the disease reach them all.
Many lived to become pupas and moths.
Grayskin sent messages to his friend Karr by the birds of passage, to say that he was alive and faring well.
But the birds told Karr confidentially that on several occasions Grayskin had been pursued by poachers, and that only with the greatest difficulty had he escaped.
Karr lived in a state of continual grief, yearning, and anxiety.
Yet he had to wait two whole summers more before there was an end of the caterpillars!
Karr no sooner heard the game-keeper say that the forest was out of danger than he started on a hunt for Helpless.
But when he was in the thick of the forest he made a frightful discovery: He could not hunt any more, he could not run, he could not track his enemy, and he could not see at all!
During the long years of waiting, old age had overtaken Karr.
He had grown old without having noticed it.
He had not the strength even to kill a water-snake.
He was not able to save his friend Grayskin from his enemy.
RETRIBUTION
One afternoon Akka from Kebnekaise and her flock alighted on the shore of a forest lake.
Spring was backward - as it always is in the mountain districts. Ice covered all the lake save a narrow strip next the land. The geese at once plunged into the water to bathe and hunt for food.
In the morning Nils Holgersson had dropped one of his wooden shoes, so he went down by the elms and birches that grew along the shore, to look for something to bind around his foot.
The boy walked quite a distance before he found anything that he could use.
He glanced about nervously, for he did not fancy being in the forest.
"Give me the plains and the lakes!" he thought. "There you can see what you are likely to meet.
Now, if this were a grove of little birches, it would be well enough, for then the ground would be almost bare; but how people can like these wild, pathless forests is incomprehensible to me.
If I owned this land I would chop down every tree."
At last he caught sight of a piece of birch bark, and just as he was fitting it to his foot he heard a rustle behind him.
He turned quickly.
A snake darted from the brush straight toward him!
The snake was uncommonly long and thick, but the boy soon saw that it had a white spot on each cheek.
"Why, it's only a water-snake," he laughed; "it can't harm me."
But the next instant the snake gave him a powerful blow on the chest that knocked him down. The boy was on his feet in a second and running away, but the snake was after him!
The ground was stony and scrubby; the boy could not proceed very fast; and the snake was close at his heels.
Then the boy saw a big rock in front of him, and began to scale it.
"I do hope the snake can't follow me here!"
he thought, but he had no sooner reached the top of the rock than he saw that the snake was following him.
Quite close to the boy, on a narrow ledge at the top of the rock, lay a round stone as large as a man's head. As the snake came closer, the boy ran behind the stone, and gave it a push.
It rolled right down on the snake, drawing it along to the ground, where it landed on its head.
"That stone did its work well!"
thought the boy with a sigh of relief, as he saw the snake squirm a little, and then lie perfectly still.
"I don't think I've been in greater peril on the whole journey," he said.
He had hardly recovered from the shock when he heard a rustle above him, and saw a bird circling through the air to light on the ground right beside the snake.
The bird was like a crow in size and form, but was dressed in a pretty coat of shiny black feathers.
The boy cautiously retreated into a crevice of the rock.
His adventure in being kidnapped by crows was still fresh in his memory, and he did not care to show himself when there was no need of it.
The bird strode back and forth beside the snake's body, and turned it over with his beak.
Finally he spread his wings and began to shriek in ear-splitting tones:
"It is certainly Helpless, the water-snake, that lies dead here!"
Once more he walked the length of the snake; then he stood in a deep study, and scratched his neck with his foot.
"It isn't possible that there can be two such big snakes in the forest," he pondered.
"It must surely be Helpless!"
He was just going to thrust his beak into the snake, but suddenly checked himself.
"You mustn't be a numbskull, Bataki!"
he remarked to himself.
"Surely you cannot be thinking of eating the snake until you have called Karr!
He wouldn't believe that Helpless was dead unless he could see it with his own eyes."
The boy tried to keep quiet, but the bird was so ludicrously solemn, as he stalked back and forth chattering to himself, that he had to laugh.
The bird heard him, and, with a flap of his wings, he was up on the rock.
The boy rose quickly and walked toward him.
"Are you not the one who is called Bataki, the raven?
and are you not a friend of Akka from Kebnekaise?"
asked the boy.
The bird regarded him intently; then nodded three times.
"Surely, you're not the little chap who flies around with the wild geese, and whom they call Thumbietot?"
"Oh, you're not so far out of the way," said the boy.
"What luck that I should have run across you!
Perhaps you can tell me who killed this water-snake?"
"The stone which I rolled down on him killed him," replied the boy, and related how the whole thing happened.
"That was cleverly done for one who is as tiny as you are!"
said the raven.
"I have a friend in these parts who will be glad to know that this snake has been killed, and I should like to render you a service in return."
"Then tell me why you are glad the water-snake is dead," responded the boy.
"It's a long story," said the raven; "you wouldn't have the patience to listen to it."
But the boy insisted that he had, and then the raven told him the whole story about Karr and Grayskin and Helpless, the water-snake.
When he had finished, the boy sat quietly for a moment, looking straight ahead.
Then he spoke:
"I seem to like the forest better since hearing this.
I wonder if there is anything left of the old Liberty Forest."
"Most of it has been destroyed," said Bataki.
"The trees look as if they had passed through a fire.
They'll have to be cleared away, and it will take many years before the forest will be what it once was."
"That snake deserved his death!"
declared the boy.
"But I wonder if it could be possible that he was so wise he could send sickness to the caterpillars?"
"Perhaps he knew that they frequently became sick in that way," intimated Bataki.
"Yes, that may be; but all the same, I must say that he was a very wily snake."
The boy stopped talking because he saw the raven was not listening to him, but sitting with gaze averted.
"Hark!"
he said.
"Karr is in the vicinity.
Won't he be happy when he sees that Helpless is dead!"
The boy turned his head in the direction of the sound.
"He's talking with the wild geese," he said.
"Oh, you may be sure that he has dragged himself down to the strand to get the latest news about Grayskin!"
Both the boy and the raven jumped to the ground, and hastened down to the shore.
All the geese had come out of the lake, and stood talking with an old dog, who was so weak and decrepit that it seemed as if he might drop dead at any moment.
"There's Karr," said Bataki to the boy.
"Let him hear first what the wild geese have to say to him; later we shall tell him that the water-snake is dead."
Presently they heard Akka talking to Karr.
"It happened last year while we were making our usual spring trip," remarked the leader-goose. "We started out one morning - Yksi, Kaksi, and I, and we flew over the great boundary forests between Dalecarlia and Hälsingland. Under us we, saw only thick pine forests.
The snow was still deep among the trees, and the creeks were mostly frozen.
"Suddenly we noticed three poachers down in the forest!
They were on skis, had dogs in leash, carried knives in their belts, but had no guns.
"As there was a hard crust on the snow, they did not bother to take the winding forest paths, but skied straight ahead.
Apparently they knew very well where they must go to find what they were seeking.
"We wild geese flew on, high up in the air, so that the whole forest under us was visible. When we sighted the poachers we wanted to find out where the game was, so we circled up and down, peering through the trees.
Then, in a dense thicket, we saw something that looked like big, moss-covered rocks, but couldn't be rocks, for there was no snow on them.
"We shot down, suddenly, and lit in the centre of the thicket.
The three rocks moved.
They were three elk - a bull and two cows - resting in the bleak forest.
"When we alighted, the elk bull rose and came toward us.
He was the most superb animal we had ever seen.
When he saw that it was only some poor wild geese that had awakened him, he lay down again.
"'No, old granddaddy, you mustn't go back to sleep!'
I cried.
'Flee as fast as you can!
There are poachers in the forest, and they are bound for this very deer fold.'
"'Thank you, goose mother!'
said the elk.
He seemed to be dropping to sleep while he was speaking.
'But surely you must know that we elk are under the protection of the law at this time of the year.
Those poachers are probably out for fox,' he yawned.
"'There are plenty of fox trails in the forest, but the poachers are not looking for them. Believe me, old granddaddy! They know that you are lying here, and are coming to attack you.
They have no guns with them - only spears and knives - for they dare not fire a shot at this season.'
"The elk bull lay there calmly, but the elk cows seemed to feel uneasy.
"'It may be as the geese say,' they remarked, beginning to bestir themselves.
"'You just lie down!'
said the elk bull.
'There are no poachers coming here; of that you may be certain.'
"There was nothing more to be done, so we wild geese rose again into the air.
But we continued to circle over the place, to see how it would turn out for the elk.
"We had hardly reached our regular flying altitude, when we saw the elk bull come out from the thicket. He sniffed the air a little, then walked straight toward the poachers. As he strode along he stepped upon dry twigs that crackled noisily.
A big barren marsh lay just beyond him.
Thither he went and took his stand in the middle, where there was nothing to hide him from view.
"There he stood until the poachers emerged from the woods.
Then he turned and fled in the opposite direction.
The poachers let loose the dogs, and they themselves skied after him at full speed.
"The elk threw back his head and loped as fast as he could. He kicked up snow until it flew like a blizzard about him. Both dogs and men were left far behind. Then the elk stopped, as if to await their approach.
When they were within sight he dashed ahead again.
We understood that he was purposely tempting the hunters away from the place where the cows were.
We thought it brave of him to face danger himself, in order that those who were dear to him might be left in safety.
None of us wanted to leave the place until we had seen how all this was to end.
"Thus the chase continued for two hours or more.
We wondered that the poachers went to the trouble of pursuing the elk when they were not armed with rifles.
They couldn't have thought that they could succeed in tiring out a runner like him!
"Then we noticed that the elk no longer ran so rapidly.
He stepped on the snow more carefully, and every time he lifted his feet, blood could be seen in his tracks.
"We understood why the poachers had been so persistent! They had counted on help from the snow. The elk was heavy, and with every step he sank to the bottom of the drift. The hard crust on the snow was scraping his legs.
It scraped away the fur, and tore out pieces of flesh, so that he was in torture every time he put his foot down.
"The poachers and the dogs, who were so light that the ice crust could hold their weight, pursued him all the while. He ran on and on - his steps becoming more and more uncertain and faltering. He gasped for breath.
Not only did he suffer intense pain, but he was also exhausted from wading through the deep snowdrifts.
"At last he lost all patience.
He paused to let poachers and dogs come upon him, and was ready to fight them.
As he stood there waiting, he glanced upward.
When he saw us wild geese circling above him, he cried out:
"'Stay here, wild geese, until all is over!
And the next time you fly over Kolmården, look up Karr, and ask him if he doesn't think that his friend Grayskin has met with a happy end?'"
When Akka had gone so far in her story the old dog rose and walked nearer to her.
"Grayskin led a good life," he said.
"He understands me.
He knows that I'm a brave dog, and that I shall be glad to hear that he had a happy end.
Now tell me how - "
He raised his tail and threw back his head, as if to give himself a bold and proud bearing - then he collapsed.
"Karr!
Karr!"
called a man's voice from the forest.
The old dog rose obediently.
"My master is calling me," he said, "and I must not tarry longer.
I just saw him load his gun.
Now we two are going into the forest for the last time.
"Many thanks, wild goose!
I know everything that I need know to die content!"
IN NÄRKE
In bygone days there was something in Närke the like of which was not to be found elsewhere: it was a witch, named Ysätter-Kaisa.
The name Kaisa had been given her because she had a good deal to do with wind and storm - and these wind witches are always so called.
The surname was added because she was supposed to have come from Ysätter swamp in Asker parish.
It seemed as though her real abode must have been at Asker; but she used also to appear at other places.
Nowhere in all Närke could one be sure of not meeting her.
She was no dark, mournful witch, but gay and frolicsome; and what she loved most of all was a gale of wind. As soon as there was wind enough, off she would fly to the Närke plain for a good dance.
On days when a whirlwind swept the plain, Ysätter-Kaisa had fun!
She would stand right in the wind and spin round, her long hair flying up among the clouds and the long trail of her robe sweeping the ground, like a dust cloud, while the whole plain lay spread out under her, like a ballroom floor.
Of a morning Ysätter-Kaisa would sit up in some tall pine at the top of a precipice, and look across the plain.
If it happened to be winter and she saw many teams on the roads she hurriedly blew up a blizzard, piling the drifts so high that people could barely get back to their homes by evening.
If it chanced to be summer and good harvest weather, Ysätter-Kaisa would sit quietly until the first hayricks had been loaded, then down she would come with a couple of heavy showers, which put an end to the work for that day.
It was only too true that she seldom thought of anything else than raising mischief.
The charcoal burners up in the Kil mountains hardly dared take a cat-nap, for as soon as she saw an unwatched kiln, she stole up and blew on it until it began to burn in a great flame.
If the metal drivers from Laxå and Svartå were out late of an evening, Ysätter-Kaisa would veil the roads and the country round about in such dark clouds that both men and horses lost their way and drove the heavy trucks down into swamps and morasses.
If, on a summer's day, the dean's wife at Glanshammar had spread the tea table in the garden and along would come a gust of wind that lifted the cloth from the table and turned over cups and saucers, they knew who had raised the mischief!
If the mayor of Örebro's hat blew off, so that he had to run across the whole square after it; if the wash on the line blew away and got covered with dirt, or if the smoke poured into the cabins and seemed unable to find its way out through the chimney, it was easy enough to guess who was out making merry!
Although Ysätter-Kaisa was fond of all sorts of tantalizing games, there was nothing really bad about her. One could see that she was hardest on those who were quarrelsome, stingy, or wicked; while honest folk and poor little children she would take under her wing.
Old people say of her that, once, when Asker church was burning, Ysätter-Kaisa swept through the air, lit amid fire and smoke on the church roof, and averted the disaster.
All the same the Närke folk were often rather tired of Ysätter-Kaisa, but she never tired of playing her tricks on them.
As she sat on the edge of a cloud and looked down upon Närke, which rested so peacefully and comfortably beneath her, she must have thought: "The inhabitants would fare much too well if I were not in existence.
They would grow sleepy and dull.
There must be some one like myself to rouse them and keep them in good spirits."
Then she would laugh wildly and, chattering like a magpie, would rush off, dancing and spinning from one end of the plain to the other. When a Närke man saw her come dragging her dust trail over the plain, he could not help smiling.
Provoking and tiresome she certainly was, but she had a merry spirit.
It was just as refreshing for the peasants to meet Ysätter-Kaisa as it was for the plain to be lashed by the windstorm.
Nowadays 'tis said that Ysätter-Kaisa is dead and gone, like all other witches, but this one can hardly believe.
It is as if some one were to come and tell you that henceforth the air would always be still on the plain, and the wind would never more dance across it with blustering breezes and drenching showers.
He who fancies that Ysätter-Kaisa is dead and gone may as well hear what occurred in Närke the year that Nils Holgersson travelled over that part of the country.
Then let him tell what he thinks about it.
MARKET EVE
Wednesday, April twenty-seventh.
It was the day before the big Cattle Fair at Örebro; it rained in torrents and people thought: "This is exactly as in Ysätter-Kaisa's time! At fairs she used to be more prankish than usual.
It was quite in her line to arrange a downpour like this on a market eve."
As the day wore on, the rain increased, and toward evening came regular cloud-bursts. The roads were like bottomless swamps. The farmers who had started from home with their cattle early in the morning, that they might arrive at a seasonable hour, fared badly.
Cows and oxen were so tired they could hardly move, and many of the poor beasts dropped down in the middle of the road, to show that they were too exhausted to go any farther.
All who lived along the roadside had to open their doors to the market-bound travellers, and harbour them as best they could.
Farm houses, barns, and sheds were soon crowded to their limit.
Meanwhile, those who could struggle along toward the inn did so; but when they arrived they wished they had stopped at some cabin along the road. All the cribs in the barn and all the stalls in the stable were already occupied.
There was no other choice than to let horses and cattle stand out in the rain.
Their masters could barely manage to get under cover.
The crush and mud and slush in the barn yard were frightful! Some of the animals were standing in puddles and could not even lie down.
There were thoughtful masters, of course, who procured straw for their animals to lie on, and spread blankets over them; but there were those, also, who sat in the inn, drinking and gambling, entirely forgetful of the dumb creatures which they should have protected.
The boy and the wild geese had come to a little wooded island in Hjälmar Lake that evening.
The island was separated from the main land by a narrow and shallow stream, and at low tide one could pass over it dry-shod.
It rained just as hard on the island as it did everywhere else.
The boy could not sleep for the water that kept dripping down on him.
Finally he got up and began to walk.
He fancied that he felt the rain less when he moved about.
He had hardly circled the island, when he heard a splashing in the stream. Presently he saw a solitary horse tramping among the trees. Never in all his life had he seen such a wreck of a horse!
He was broken-winded and stiff-kneed and so thin that every rib could be seen under the hide.
He bore neither harness nor saddle - only an old bridle, from which dangled a half-rotted rope-end.
Obviously he had had no difficulty in breaking loose.
The horse walked straight toward the spot where the wild geese were sleeping.
The boy was afraid that he would step on them.
"Where are you going?
Feel your ground!"
shouted the boy.
"Oh, there you are!"
exclaimed the horse.
"I've walked miles to meet you!"
"Have you heard of me?"
asked the boy, astonished.
"I've got ears, even if I am old!
There are many who talk of you nowadays."
As he spoke, the horse bent his head that he might see better, and the boy noticed that he had a small head, beautiful eyes, and a soft, sensitive nose.
"He must have been a good horse at the start, though he has come to grief in his old age," he thought.
"I wish you would come with me and help me with something," pleaded the horse.
The boy thought it would be embarrassing to accompany a creature who looked so wretched, and excused himself on account of the bad weather.
"You'll be no worse off on my back than you are lying here," said the horse.
"But perhaps you don't dare to go with an old tramp of a horse like me."
"Certainly I dare!"
said the boy.
"Then wake the geese, so that we can arrange with them where they shall come for you to-morrow," said the horse.
The boy was soon seated on the animal's back. The old nag trotted along better than he had thought possible. It was a long ride in the rain and darkness before they halted near a large inn, where everything looked terribly uninviting!
The wheel tracks were so deep in the road that the boy feared he might drown should he fall down into them.
Alongside the fence, which enclosed the yard, some thirty or forty horses and cattle were tied, with no protection against the rain, and in the yard were wagons piled with packing cases, where sheep, calves, hogs, and chickens were shut in.
The horse walked over to the fence and stationed himself.
The boy remained seated upon his back, and, with his good night eyes, plainly saw how badly the animals fared.
"How do you happen to be standing out here in the rain?"
he asked.
"We're on our way to a fair at Örebro, but we were obliged to put up here on account of the rain.
This is an inn; but so many travellers have already arrived that there's no room for us in the barns."
The boy made no reply, but sat quietly looking about him. Not many of the animals were asleep, and on all sides he heard complaints and indignant protests. They had reason enough for grumbling, for the weather was even worse than it had been earlier in the day.
A freezing wind had begun to blow, and the rain which came beating down on them was turning to snow.
It was easy enough to understand what the horse wanted the boy to help him with.
"Do you see that fine farm yard directly opposite the inn?"
remarked the horse.
"Yes, I see it," answered the boy, "and I can't comprehend why they haven't tried to find shelter for all of you in there.
They are already full, perhaps?"
"No, there are no strangers in that place," said the horse.
"The people who live on that farm are so stingy and selfish that it would be useless for any one to ask them for harbour."
"If that's the case, I suppose you'll have to stand where you are."
"I was born and raised on that farm," said the horse; "I know that there is a large barn and a big cow shed, with many empty stalls and mangers, and I was wondering if you couldn't manage in some way or other to get us in over there."
"I don't think I could venture - " hesitated the boy.
But he felt so sorry for the poor beasts that he wanted at least to try.
He ran into the strange barn yard and saw at once that all the outhouses were locked and the keys gone. He stood there, puzzled and helpless, when aid came to him from an unexpected source.
A gust of wind came sweeping along with terrific force and flung open a shed door right in front of him.
The boy was not long in getting back to the horse.
"It isn't possible to get into the barn or the cow house," he said, "but there's a big, empty hay shed that they have forgotten to bolt.
I can lead you into that."
"Thank you!"
said the horse.
"It will seem good to sleep once more on familiar ground.
It's the only happiness I can expect in this life."
Meanwhile, at the flourishing farm opposite the inn, the family sat up much later than usual that evening.
The master of the place was a man of thirty-five, tall and dignified, with a handsome but melancholy face.
During the day he had been out in the rain and had got wet, like every one else, and at supper he asked his old mother, who was still mistress of the place, to light a fire on the hearth that he might dry his clothes.
The mother kindled a feeble blaze - for in that house they were not wasteful with wood - and the master hung his coat on the back of a chair, and placed it before the fire.
With one foot on top of the andiron and a hand resting on his knee, he stood gazing into the embers.
Thus he stood for two whole hours, making no move other than to cast a log on the fire now and then.
The mistress removed the supper things and turned down his bed for the night before she went to her own room and seated herself.
At intervals she came to the door and looked wonderingly at her son.
"It's nothing, mother.
I'm only thinking," he said.
His thoughts were on something that had occurred shortly before: When he passed the inn a horse dealer had asked him if he would not like to purchase a horse, and had shown him an old nag so weather-beaten that he asked the dealer if he took him for a fool, since he wished to palm off such a played-out beast on him.
"Oh, no!"
said the horse dealer.
"I only thought that, inasmuch as the horse once belonged to you, you might wish to give him a comfortable home in his old age; he has need of it."
Then he looked at the horse and recognized it as one which he himself had raised and broken in; but it did not occur to him to purchase such an old and useless creature on that account.
No, indeed!
He was not one who squandered his money.
All the same, the sight of the horse had awakened many, memories - and it was the memories that kept him awake.
That horse had been a fine animal. His father had let him tend it from the start. He had broken it in and had loved it above everything else.
His father had complained that he used to feed it too well, and often he had been obliged to steal out and smuggle oats to it.
Once, when he ventured to talk with his father about letting him buy a broadcloth suit, or having the cart painted, his father stood as if petrified, and he thought the old man would have a stroke.
He tried to make his father understand that, when he had a fine horse to drive, he should look presentable himself.
The father made no reply, but two days later he took the horse to Örebro and sold it.
It was cruel of him. But it was plain that his father had feared that this horse might lead him into vanity and extravagance. And now, so long afterward, he had to admit that his father was right. A horse like that surely would have been a temptation.
At first he had grieved terribly over his loss.
Many a time he had gone down to Örebro, just to stand on a street corner and see the horse pass by, or to steal into the stable and give him a lump of sugar.
He thought: "If I ever get the farm, the first thing I do will be to buy back my horse."
Now his father was gone and he himself had been master for two years, but he had not made a move toward buying the horse.
He had not thought of him for ever so long, until to-night.
It was strange that he should have forgotten the beast so entirely!
His father had been a very headstrong, domineering man. When his son was grown and the two had worked together, the father had gained absolute power over him.
The boy had come to think that everything his father did was right, and, after he became the master, he only tried to do exactly as his father would have done.
He knew, of course, that folk said his father was stingy; but it was well to keep a tight hold on one's purse and not throw away money needlessly. The goods one has received should not be wasted.
It was better to live on a debt-free place and be called stingy, than to carry heavy mortgages, like other farm owners.
He had gone so far in his mind when he was called back by a strange sound.
It was as if a shrill, mocking voice were repeating his thoughts: "It's better to keep a firm hold on one's purse and be called stingy, than to be in debt, like other farm owners."
It sounded as if some one was trying to make sport of his wisdom and he was about to lose his temper, when he realized that it was all a mistake.
The wind was beginning to rage, and he had been standing there getting so sleepy that he mistook the howling of the wind in the chimney for human speech.
He glanced up at the wall clock, which just then struck eleven.
"It's time that you were in bed," he remarked to himself. Then he remembered that he had not yet gone the rounds of the farm yard, as it was his custom to do every night, to make sure that all doors were closed and all lights extinguished.
This was something he had never neglected since he became master.
He drew on his coat and went out in the storm.
He found everything as it should be, save that the door to the empty hay shed had been blown open by the wind. He stepped inside for the key, locked the shed door and put the key into his coat pocket.
Then he went back to the house, removed his coat, and hung it before the fire.
Even now he did not retire, but began pacing the floor.
The storm without, with its biting wind and snow-blended rain, was terrible, and his old horse was standing in this storm without so much as a blanket to protect him!
He should at least have given his old friend a roof over his head, since he had come such a long distance.
At the inn across the way the boy heard an old wall clock strike eleven times. Just then he was untying the animals to lead them to the shed in the farm yard opposite. It took some time to rouse them and get them into line.
When all were ready, they marched in a long procession into the stingy farmer's yard, with the boy as their guide.
While the boy had been assembling them, the farmer had gone the rounds of the farm yard and locked the hay shed, so that when the animals came along the door was closed.
The boy stood there dismayed.
He could not let the creatures stand out there!
He must go into the house and find the key.
"Keep them quiet out here while I go in and fetch the key!"
he said to the old horse, and off he ran.
On the path right in front of the house he paused to think out how he should get inside.
As he stood there he noticed two little wanderers coming down the road, who stopped before the inn.
The boy saw at once that they were two little girls, and ran toward them.
"Come now, Britta Maja!"
said one, "you mustn't cry any more.
Now we are at the inn.
Here they will surely take us in."
The girl had but just said this when the boy called to her:
"No, you mustn't try to get in there.
It is simply impossible.
But at the farm house opposite there are no guests.
Go there instead."
The little girls heard the words distinctly, though they could not see the one who spoke to them.
They did not wonder much at that, however, for the night was as black as pitch.
The larger of the girls promptly answered:
"We don't care to enter that place, because those who live there are stingy and cruel.
It is their fault that we two must go out on the highways and beg."
"That may be so," said the boy, "but all the same you should go there.
You shall see that it will be well for you."
"We can try, but it is doubtful that they will even let us enter," observed the two little girls as they walked up to the house and knocked.
The master was standing by the fire thinking of the horse when he heard the knocking. He stepped to the door to see what was up, thinking all the while that he would not let himself be tempted into admitting any wayfarer.
As he fumbled the lock, a gust of wind came along, wrenched the door from his hand and swung it open.
To close it, he had to step out on the porch, and, when he stepped back into the house, the two little girls were standing within.
They were two poor beggar girls, ragged, dirty, and starving - two little tots bent under the burden of their beggar's packs, which were as large as themselves.
"Who are you that go prowling about at this hour of the night?"
said the master gruffly.
The two children did not answer immediately, but first removed their packs.
Then they walked up to the man and stretched forth their tiny hands in greeting.
"We are Anna and Britta Maja from the Engärd," said the elder, "and we were going to ask for a night's lodging."
He did not take the outstretched hands and was just about to drive out the beggar children, when a fresh recollection faced him. Engärd - was not that a little cabin where a poor widow with five children had lived?
The widow had owed his father a few hundred kroner and in order to get back his money he had sold her cabin.
After that the widow, with her three eldest children, went to Norrland to seek employment, and the two youngest became a charge on the parish.
As he called this to mind he grew bitter.
He knew that his father had been severely censured for squeezing out that money, which by right belonged to him.
"What are you doing nowadays?"
he asked in a cross tone.
"Didn't the board of charities take charge of you?
Why do you roam around and beg?"
"It's not our fault," replied the larger girl.
"The people with whom we are living have sent us out to beg."
"Well, your packs are filled," the farmer observed, "so you can't complain. Now you'd better take out some of the food you have with you and eat your fill, for here you'll get no food, as all the women folk are in bed.
Later you may lie down in the corner by the hearth, so you won't have to freeze."
He waved his hand, as if to ward them off, and his eyes took on a hard look. He was thankful that he had had a father who had been careful of his property.
Otherwise, he might perhaps have been forced in childhood to run about and beg, as these children now did.
No sooner had he thought this out to the end than the shrill, mocking voice he had heard once before that evening repeated it, word for word.
He listened, and at once understood that it was nothing - only the wind roaring in the chimney.
But the queer thing about it was, when the wind repeated his thoughts, they seemed so strangely stupid and hard and false!
The children meanwhile had stretched themselves, side by side, on the floor.
They were not quiet, but lay there muttering.
"Do be still, won't you?"
he growled, for he was in such an irritable mood that he could have beaten them.
But the mumbling continued, and again he called for silence.
"When mother went away," piped a clear little voice, "she made me promise that every night I would say my evening prayer.
I must do this, and Britta Maja too.
As soon as we have said 'God who cares for little children - ' we'll be quiet."
The master sat quite still while the little ones said their prayers, then he rose and began pacing back and forth, back and forth, wringing his hands all the while, as though he had met with some great sorrow.
"The horse driven out and wrecked, these two children turned into road beggars - both father's doings!
Perhaps father did not do right after all?"
he thought.
He sat down again and buried his head in his hands.
Suddenly his lips began to quiver and into his eyes came tears, which he hastily wiped away.
Fresh tears came, and he was just as prompt to brush these away; but it was useless, for more followed.
When his mother stepped into the room, he swung his chair quickly and turned his back to her. She must have noticed something unusual, for she stood quietly behind him a long while, as if waiting for him to speak.
She realized how difficult it always is for men to talk of the things they feel most deeply.
She must help him of course.
From her bedroom she had observed all that had taken place in the living room, so that she did not have to ask questions.
She walked very softly over to the two sleeping children, lifted them, and bore them to her own bed.
Then she went back to her son.
"Lars," she said, as if she did not see that he was weeping, "you had better let me keep these children."
"What, mother?"
he gasped, trying to smother the sobs.
"I have been suffering for years - ever since father took the cabin from their mother, and so have you."
"Yes, but - "
"I want to keep them here and make something of them; they are too good to beg."
He could not speak, for now the tears were beyond his control; but he took his old mother's withered hand and patted it.
Then he jumped up, as if something had frightened him.
"What would father have said of this?"
"Father had his day at ruling," retorted the mother.
"Now it is your day.
As long as father lived we had to obey him.
Now is the time to show what you are."
Her son was so astonished that he ceased crying.
"But I have just shown what I am!"
he returned.
"No, you haven't," protested the mother. "You only try to be like him. Father experienced hard times, which made him fear poverty. He believed that he had to think of himself first. But you have never had any difficulties that should make you hard.
You have more than you need, and it would be unnatural of you not to think of others."
When the two little girls entered the house the boy slipped in behind them and secreted himself in a dark corner.
He had not been there long before he caught a glimpse of the shed key, which the farmer had thrust into his coat pocket.
"When the master of the house drives the children out, I'll take the key and ran," he thought.
But the children were not driven out and the boy crouched in the corner, not knowing what he should do next.
The mother talked long with her son, and while she was speaking he stopped weeping.
Gradually his features softened; he looked like another person.
All the while he was stroking the wasted old hand.
"Now we may as well retire," said the old lady when she saw that he was calm again.
"No," he said, suddenly rising, "I cannot retire yet.
There's a stranger without whom I must shelter to-night!"
He said nothing further, but quickly drew on his coat, lit the lantern and went out. There were the same wind and chill without, but as he stepped to the porch he began to sing softly.
He wondered if the horse would know him, and if he would be glad to come back to his old stable.
As he crossed the house yard he heard a door slam.
"That shed door has blown open again," he thought, and went over to close it.
A moment later he stood by the shed and was just going to shut the door, when he heard a rustling within.
The boy, who had watched his opportunity, had run directly to the shed, where he left the animals, but they were no longer out in the rain: A strong wind had long since thrown open the door and helped them to get a roof over their heads.
The patter which the master heard was occasioned by the boy running into the shed.
By the light of the lantern the man could see into the shed.
The whole floor was covered with sleeping cattle.
There was no human being to be seen; the animals were not bound, but were lying, here and there, in the straw.
He was enraged at the intrusion and began storming and shrieking to rouse the sleepers and drive them out.
But the creatures lay still and would not let themselves be disturbed.
The only one that rose was an old horse that came slowly toward him.
All of a sudden the man became silent.
He recognized the beast by its gait.
He raised the lantern, and the horse came over and laid its head on his shoulder.
The master patted and stroked it.
"My old horsy, my old horsy!" he said. "What have they done to you? Yes, dear, I'll buy you back. You'll never again have to leave this place. You shall do whatever you like, horsy mine!
Those whom you have brought with you may remain here, but you shall come with me to the stable.
Now I can give you all the oats you are able to eat, without having to smuggle them.
And you're not all used up, either!
The handsomest horse on the church knoll - that's what you shall be once more!
There, there!
There, there!"
Thursday, April twenty-eighth.
The following day the weather was clear and beautiful.
There was a strong west wind; people were glad of that, for it dried up the roads, which had been soaked by the heavy rains of the day before.
Early in the morning the two Småland children, Osa, the goose girl, and little Mats, were out on the highway leading from Sörmland to Närke.
The road ran alongside the southern shore of Hjälmar Lake and the children were walking along looking at the ice, which covered the greater part of it.
The morning sun darted its clear rays upon the ice, which did not look dark and forbidding, like most spring ice, but sparkled temptingly.
As far as they could see, the ice was firm and dry.
The rain had run down into cracks and hollows, or been absorbed by the ice itself.
The children saw only the sound ice.
Osa, the goose girl, and little Mats were on their way North, and they could not help thinking of all the steps they would be saved if they could cut straight across the lake instead of going around it.
They knew, to be sure, that spring ice is treacherous, but this looked perfectly secure.
They could see that it was several inches thick near the shore.
They saw a path which they might follow, and the opposite shore appeared to be so near that they ought to be able to get there in an hour.
"Come, let's try!"
said little Mats.
"If we only look before us, so that we don't go down into some hole, we can do it."
So they went out on the lake. The ice was not very slippery, but rather easy to walk upon. There was more water on it than they expected to see, and here and there were cracks, where the water purled up.
One had to watch out for such places; but that was easy to do in broad daylight, with the sun shining.
The children advanced rapidly, and talked only of how sensible they were to have gone out on the ice instead of tramping the slushy road.
When they had been walking a while they came to Vin Island, where an old woman had sighted them from her window. She rushed from her cabin, waved them back, and shouted something which they could not hear.
They understood perfectly well that she was warning them not to come any farther; but they thought there was no immediate danger.
It would be stupid for them to leave the ice when all was going so well!
Therefore they went on past Vin Island and had a stretch of seven miles of ice ahead of them.
Out there was so much water that the children were obliged to take roundabout ways; but that was sport to them. They vied with each other as to which could find the soundest ice. They were neither tired nor hungry.
The whole day was before them, and they laughed at each obstacle they met.
Now and then they cast a glance ahead at the farther shore.
It still appeared far away, although they had been walking a good hour.
They were rather surprised that the lake was so broad.
"The shore seems to be moving farther away from us," little Mats observed.
Out there the children were not protected against the wind, which was becoming stronger and stronger every minute, and was pressing their clothing so close to their bodies that they could hardly go on.
The cold wind was the first disagreeable thing they had met with on the journey.
But the amazing part of it was that the wind came sweeping along with a loud roar - as if it brought with it the noise of a large mill or factory, though nothing of the kind was to be found out there on the ice.
They had walked to the west of the big island, Valen; now they thought they were nearing the north shore.
Suddenly the wind began to blow more and more, while the loud roaring increased so rapidly that they began to feel uneasy.
All at once it occurred to them that the roar was caused by the foaming and rushing of the waves breaking against a shore.
Even this seemed improbable, since the lake was still covered with ice.
At all events, they paused and looked about. They noticed far in the west a white bank which stretched clear across the lake. At first they thought it was a snowbank alongside a road. Later they realized it was the foam-capped waves dashing against the ice!
They took hold of hands and ran without saying a word.
Open sea lay beyond in the west, and suddenly the streak of foam appeared to be moving eastward.
They wondered if the ice was going to break all over.
What was going to happen?
They felt now that they were in great danger.
All at once it seemed as if the ice under their feet rose - rose and sank, as if some one from below were pushing it. Presently they heard a hollow boom, and then there were cracks in the ice all around them.
The children could see how they crept along under the ice-covering.
The next moment all was still, then the rising and sinking began again.
Thereupon the cracks began to widen into crevices through which the water bubbled up.
By and by the crevices became gaps.
Soon after that the ice was divided into large floes.
"Osa," said little Mats, "this must be the breaking up of the ice!"
"Why, so it is, little Mats," said Osa, "but as yet we can get to land.
Run for your life!"
As a matter of fact, the wind and waves had a good deal of work to do yet to clear the ice from the lake.
The hardest part was done when the ice-cake burst into pieces, but all these pieces must be broken and hurled against each other, to be crushed, worn down, and dissolved.
There was still a great deal of hard and sound ice left, which formed large, unbroken surfaces.
The greatest danger for the children lay in the fact that they had no general view of the ice.
They did not see the places where the gaps were so wide that they could not possibly jump over them, nor did they know where to find any floes that would hold them, so they wandered aimlessly back and forth, going farther out on the lake instead of nearer land.
At last, confused and terrified, they stood still and wept.
Then a flock of wild geese in rapid flight came rushing by.
They shrieked loudly and sharply; but the strange thing was that above the geese-cackle the little children heard these words:
"You must go to the right, the right, the right!"
They began at once to follow the advice; but before long they were again standing irresolute, facing another broad gap.
Again they heard the geese shrieking above them, and again, amid the geese-cackle, they distinguished a few words:
"Stand where you are!
Stand where you are!"
The children did not say a word to each other, but obeyed and stood still. Soon after that the ice-floes floated together, so that they could cross the gap. Then they took hold of hands again and ran.
They were afraid not only of the peril, but of the mysterious help that had come to them.
Soon they had to stop again, and immediately the sound of the voice reached them.
"Straight ahead, straight ahead!"
it said.
This leading continued for about half an hour; by that time they had reached Ljunger Point, where they left the ice and waded to shore. They were still terribly frightened, even though they were on firm land.
They did not stop to look back at the lake - where the waves were pitching the ice-floes faster and faster - but ran on.
When they had gone a short distance along the point, Osa paused suddenly.
"Wait here, little Mats," she said; "I have forgotten something."
Osa, the goose girl, went down to the strand again, where she stopped to rummage in her bag.
Finally she fished out a little wooden shoe, which she placed on a stone where it could be plainly seen.
Then she ran to little Mats without once looking back.
But the instant her back was turned, a big white goose shot down from the sky, like a streak of lightning, snatched the wooden shoe, and flew away with it.
THE IRONWORKS
Thursday, April twenty-eighth.
When the wild geese and Thumbietot had helped Osa, the goose girl, and little Mats across the ice, they flew into Westmanland, where they alighted in a grain field to feed and rest.
A strong west wind blew almost the entire day on which the wild geese travelled over the mining districts, and as soon as they attempted to direct their course northward they were buffeted toward the east.
Now, Akka thought that Smirre Fox was at large in the eastern part of the province; therefore she would not fly in that direction, but turned back, time and again, struggling westward with great difficulty.
At this rate the wild geese advanced very slowly, and late in the afternoon they were still in the Westmanland mining districts.
Toward evening the wind abated suddenly, and the tired travellers hoped that they would have an interval of easy flight before sundown.
Then along came a violent gust of wind, which tossed the geese before it, like balls, and the boy, who was sitting comfortably, with no thought of peril, was lifted from the goose's back and hurled into space.
Little and light as he was, he could not fall straight to the ground in such a wind; so at first he was carried along with it, drifting down slowly and spasmodically, as a leaf falls from a tree.
"Why, this isn't so bad!"
thought the boy as he fell.
"I'm tumbling as easily as if I were only a scrap of paper.
Morten Goosey-Gander will doubtless hurry along and pick me up."
The first thing the boy did when he landed was to tear off his cap and wave it, so that the big white gander should see where he was.
"Here am I, where are you?
Here am I, where are you?"
he called, and was rather surprised that Morten Goosey-Gander was not already at his side.
But the big white gander was not to be seen, nor was the wild goose flock outlined against the sky.
It had entirely disappeared.
He thought this rather singular, but he was neither worried nor frightened. Not for a second did it occur to him that folk like Akka and Morten Goosey-Gander would abandon him. The unexpected gust of wind had probably borne them along with it.
As soon as they could manage to turn, they would surely come back and fetch him.
But what was this? Where on earth was he anyway? He had been standing gazing toward the sky for some sign of the geese, but now he happened to glance about him.
He had not come down on even ground, but had dropped into a deep, wide mountain cave - or whatever it might be.
It was as large as a church, with almost perpendicular walls on all four sides, and with no roof at all.
On the ground were some huge rocks, between which moss and lignon-brush and dwarfed birches grew.
Here and there in the wall were projections, from which swung rickety ladders.
At one side there was a dark passage, which apparently led far into the mountain.
The boy had not been travelling over the mining districts a whole day for nothing.
He comprehended at once that the big cleft had been made by the men who had mined ore in this place.
"I must try and climb back to earth again," he thought, "otherwise I fear that my companions won't find me!"
He was about to go over to the wall when some one seized him from behind, and he heard a gruff voice growl in his ear: "Who are you?"
The boy turned quickly, and, in the confusion of the moment, he thought he was facing a huge rock, covered with brownish moss.
Then he noticed that the rock had broad paws to walk with, a head, two eyes, and a growling mouth.
He could not pull himself together to answer, nor did the big beast appear to expect it of him, for it knocked him down, rolled him back and forth with its paws, and nosed him.
It seemed just about ready to swallow him, when it changed its mind and called:
"Brumme and Mulle, come here, you cubs, and you shall have something good to eat!"
A pair of frowzy cubs, as uncertain on their feet and as woolly as puppies, came tumbling along.
"What have you got, Mamma Bear?
May we see, oh, may we see?"
shrieked the cubs excitedly.
"Oho!
so I've fallen in with bears," thought the boy to himself.
"Now Smirre Fox won't have to trouble himself further to chase after me!"
The mother bear pushed the boy along to the cubs. One of them nabbed him quickly and ran off with him; but he did not bite hard. He was playful and wanted to amuse himself awhile with Thumbietot before eating him.
The other cub was after the first one to snatch the boy for himself, and as he lumbered along he managed to tumble straight down on the head of the one that carried the boy.
So the two cubs rolled over each other, biting, clawing, and snarling.
During the tussle the boy got loose, ran over to the wall, and started to scale it.
Then both cubs scurried after him, and, nimbly scaling the cliff, they caught up with him and tossed him down on the moss, like a ball.
"Now I know how a poor little mousie fares when it falls into the cat's claws," thought the boy.
He made several attempts to get away. He ran deep down into the old tunnel and hid behind the rocks and climbed the birches, but the cubs hunted him out, go where he would.
The instant they caught him they let him go, so that he could run away again and they should have the fun of recapturing him.
At last the boy got so sick and tired of it all that he threw himself down on the ground.
"Run away," growled the cubs, "or we'll eat you up!"
"You'll have to eat me then," said the boy, "for I can't run any more."
Immediately both cubs rushed over to the mother bear and complained:
"Mamma Bear, oh, Mamma Bear, he won't play any more."
"Then you must divide him evenly between you," said Mother Bear.
When the boy heard this he was so scared that he jumped up instantly and began playing again.
As it was bedtime, Mother Bear called to the cubs that they must come now and cuddle up to her and go to sleep.
They had been having such a good time that they wished to continue their play next day; so they took the boy between them and laid their paws over him.
They did not want him to move without waking them.
They went to sleep immediately.
The boy thought that after a while he would try to steal away.
But never in all his life had he been so tumbled and tossed and hunted and rolled!
And he was so tired out that he too fell asleep.
By and by Father Bear came clambering down the mountain wall. The boy was wakened by his tearing away stone and gravel as he swung himself into the old mine.
The boy was afraid to move much; but he managed to stretch himself and turn over, so that he could see the big bear.
He was a frightfully coarse, huge old beast, with great paws, large, glistening tusks, and wicked little eyes!
The boy could not help shuddering as he looked at this old monarch of the forest.
"It smells like a human being around here," said Father Bear the instant he came up to Mother Bear, and his growl was as the rolling of thunder.
"How can you imagine anything so absurd?" said Mother Bear without disturbing herself.
"It has been settled for good and all that we are not to harm mankind any more; but if one of them were to put in an appearance here, where the cubs and I have our quarters, there wouldn't be enough left of him for you to catch even a scent of him!"
Father Bear lay down beside Mother Bear.
"You ought to know me well enough to understand that I don't allow anything dangerous to come near the cubs.
Talk, instead, of what you have been doing.
I haven't seen you for a whole week!"
"I've been looking about for a new residence," said Father Bear.
"First I went over to Vermland, to learn from our kinsmen at Ekshärad how they fared in that country; but I had my trouble for nothing.
There wasn't a bear's den left in the whole forest."
"I believe the humans want the whole earth to themselves," said Mother Bear. "Even if we leave people and cattle in peace and live solely upon lignon and insects and green things, we cannot remain unmolested in the forest!
I wonder where we could move to in order to live in peace?"
"We've lived comfortably for many years in this pit," observed Father Bear. "But I can't be content here now since the big noise-shop has been built right in our neighbourhood. Lately I have been taking a look at the land east of Dal River, over by Garpen Mountain.
Old mine pits are plentiful there, too, and other fine retreats.
I thought it looked as if one might be fairly protected against men - "
The instant Father Bear said this he sat up and began to sniff.
"It's extraordinary that whenever I speak of human beings I catch that queer scent again," he remarked.
"Go and see for yourself if you don't believe me!"
challenged Mother Bear.
"I should just like to know where a human being could manage to hide down here?"
The bear walked all around the cave, and nosed.
Finally he went back and lay down without a word.
"What did I tell you?"
said Mother Bear.
"But of course you think that no one but yourself has any nose or ears!"
"One can't be too careful, with such neighbours as we have," said Father Bear gently. Then he leaped up with a roar.
As luck would have it, one of the cubs had moved a paw over to Nils Holgersson's face and the poor little wretch could not breathe, but began to sneeze.
It was impossible for Mother Bear to keep Father Bear back any longer.
He pushed the young ones to right and left and caught sight of the boy before he had time to sit up.
He would have swallowed him instantly if Mother Bear had not cast herself between them.
"Don't touch him!
He belongs to the cubs," she said.
"They have had such fun with him the whole evening that they couldn't bear to eat him up, but wanted to save him until morning."
Father Bear pushed Mother Bear aside.
"Don't meddle with what you don't understand!"
he roared.
"Can't you scent that human odour about him from afar?
I shall eat him at once, or he will play us some mean trick."
He opened his jaws again; but meanwhile the boy had had time to think, and, quick as a flash, he dug into his knapsack and brought forth some matches - his sole weapon of defence - struck one on his leather breeches, and stuck the burning match into the bear's open mouth.
Father Bear snorted when he smelled the sulphur, and with that the flame went out.
The boy was ready with another match, but, curiously enough, Father Bear did not repeat his attack.
"Can you light many of those little blue roses?"
asked Father Bear.
"I can light enough to put an end to the whole forest," replied the boy, for he thought that in this way he might be able to scare Father Bear.
"Oh, that would be no trick for me!"
boasted the boy, hoping that this would make the bear respect him.
"Good!"
exclaimed the bear.
"You shall render me a service.
Now I'm very glad that I did not eat you!"
Father Bear carefully took the boy between his tusks and climbed up from the pit. He did this with remarkable ease and agility, considering that he was so big and heavy. As soon as he was up, he speedily made for the woods.
It was evident that Father Bear was created to squeeze through dense forests.
The heavy body pushed through the brushwood as a boat does through the water.
Father Bear ran along till he came to a hill at the skirt of the forest, where he could see the big noise-shop.
Here he lay down and placed the boy in front of him, holding him securely between his forepaws.
"Now look down at that big noise-shop!" he commanded. The great ironworks, with many tall buildings, stood at the edge of a waterfall. High chimneys sent forth dark clouds of smoke, blasting furnaces were in full blaze, and light shone from all the windows and apertures.
Within hammers and rolling mills were going with such force that the air rang with their clatter and boom.
All around the workshops proper were immense coal sheds, great slag heaps, warehouses, wood piles, and tool sheds.
Just beyond were long rows of workingmen's homes, pretty villas, schoolhouses, assembly halls, and shops.
But there all was quiet and apparently everybody was asleep.
The boy did not glance in that direction, but gazed intently at the ironworks.
The earth around them was black; the sky above them was like a great fiery dome; the rapids, white with foam, rushed by; while the buildings themselves were sending out light and smoke, fire and sparks.
It was the grandest sight the boy had ever seen!
"Surely you don't mean to say you can set fire to a place like that?"
remarked the bear doubtingly.
The boy stood wedged between the beast's paws thinking the only thing that might save him would be that the bear should have a high opinion of his capability and power.
"It's all the same to me," he answered with a superior air.
"Big or little, I can burn it down."
"Then I'll tell you something," said Father Bear. "My forefathers lived in this region from the time that the forests first sprang up. From them I inherited hunting grounds and pastures, lairs and retreats, and have lived here in peace all my life.
In the beginning I wasn't troubled much by the human kind.
They dug in the mountains and picked up a little ore down here, by the rapids; they had a forge and a furnace, but the hammers sounded only a few hours during the day, and the furnace was not fired more than two moons at a stretch.
It wasn't so bad but that I could stand it; but these last years, since they have built this noise-shop, which keeps up the same racket both day and night, life here has become intolerable.
Formerly only a manager and a couple of blacksmiths lived here, but now there are so many people that I can never feel safe from them.
I thought that I should have to move away, but I have discovered something better!"
The boy wondered what Father Bear had hit upon, but no opportunity was afforded him to ask, as the bear took him between his tusks again and lumbered down the hill.
The boy could see nothing, but knew by the increasing noise that they were approaching the rolling mills.
Father Bear was well informed regarding the ironworks. He had prowled around there on many a dark night, had observed what went on within, and had wondered if there would never be any cessation of the work.
He had tested the walls with his paws and wished that he were only strong enough to knock down the whole structure with a single blow.
He was not easily distinguishable against the dark ground, and when, in addition, he remained in the shadow of the walls, there was not much danger of his being discovered. Now he walked fearlessly between the workshops and climbed to the top of a slag heap.
There he sat up on his haunches, took the boy between his forepaws and held him up.
"Try to look into the house!" he commanded. A strong current of air was forced into a big cylinder which was suspended from the ceiling and filled with molten iron.
As this current rushed into the mess of iron with an awful roar, showers of sparks of all colours spurted up in bunches, in sprays, in long clusters!
They struck against the wall and came splashing down over the whole big room.
Father Bear let the boy watch the gorgeous spectacle until the blowing was over and the flowing and sparkling red steel had been poured into ingot moulds.
The boy was completely charmed by the marvellous display and almost forgot that he was imprisoned between a bear's two paws.
Father Bear let him look into the rolling mill. He saw a workman take a short, thick bar of iron at white heat from a furnace opening and place it under a roller. When the iron came out from under the roller, it was flattened and extended.
Immediately another workman seized it and placed it beneath a heavier roller, which made it still longer and thinner.
Thus it was passed from roller to roller, squeezed and drawn out until, finally, it curled along the floor, like a long red thread.
But while the first bar of iron was being pressed, a second was taken from the furnace and placed under the rollers, and when this was a little along, a third was brought. Continuously fresh threads came crawling over the floor, like hissing snakes.
The boy was dazzled by the iron.
But he found it more splendid to watch the workmen who, dexterously and delicately, seized the glowing snakes with their tongs and forced them under the rollers.
It seemed like play for them to handle the hissing iron.
"I call that real man's work!"
the boy remarked to himself.
The bear then let the boy have a peep at the furnace and the forge, and he became more and more astonished as he saw how the blacksmiths handled iron and fire.
"Those men have no fear of heat and flames," he thought. The workmen were sooty and grimy. He fancied they were some sort of firefolk - that was why they could bend and mould the iron as they wished.
He could not believe that they were just ordinary men, since they had such power!
"They keep this up day after day, night after night," said Father Bear, as he dropped wearily down on the ground.
"You can understand that one gets rather tired of that kind of thing.
I'm mighty glad that at last I can put an end to it!"
"Indeed!"
said the boy.
"How will you go about it?"
"Oh, I thought that you were going to set fire to the buildings!"
said Father Bear.
"That would put an end to all this work, and I could remain in my old home."
The boy was all of a shiver.
So it was for this that Father Bear had brought him here!
"If you will set fire to the noise-works, I'll promise to spare your life," said Father Bear. "But if you don't do it, I'll make short work of you!"
The huge workshops were built of brick, and the boy was thinking to himself that Father Bear could command as much as he liked, it was impossible to obey him.
Presently he saw that it might not be impossible after all.
Just beyond them lay a pile of chips and shavings to which he could easily set fire, and beside it was a wood pile that almost reached the coal shed.
The coal shed extended over to the workshops, and if that once caught fire, the flames would soon fly over to the roof of the iron foundry.
Everything combustible would burn, the walls would fall from the heat, and the machinery would be destroyed. "
Will you or won't you?"
demanded Father Bear.
The boy knew that he ought to answer promptly that he would not, but he also knew that then the bear's paws would squeeze him to death; therefore he replied:
"I shall have to think it over."
"Very well, do so," assented Father Bear.
"Let me say to you that iron is the thing that has given men the advantage over us bears, which is another reason for my wishing to put an end to the work here."
The boy thought he would use the delay to figure out some plan of escape, but he was so worried he could not direct his thoughts where he would; instead he began to think of the great help that iron had been to mankind. They needed iron for everything.
There was iron in the plough that broke up the field, in the axe that felled the tree for building houses, in the scythe that mowed the grain, and in the knife, which could be turned to all sorts of uses.
There was iron in the horse's bit, in the lock on the door, in the nails that held furniture together, in the sheathing that covered the roof.
The rifle which drove away wild beasts was made of iron, also the pick that had broken up the mine.
Iron covered the men-of-war he had seen at Karlskrona; the locomotives steamed through the country on iron rails; the needle that had stitched his coat was of iron; the shears that clipped the sheep and the kettle that cooked the food.
Big and little alike - much that was indispensable was made from iron.
Father Bear was perfectly right in saying that it was the iron that had given men their mastery over the bears.
"Now will you or won't you?"
Father Bear repeated.
The boy was startled from his musing.
Here he stood thinking of matters that were entirely unnecessary, and had not yet found a way to save himself!
"You mustn't be so impatient," he said.
"This is a serious matter for me, and I've got to have time to consider."
"Well, then, consider another moment," said Father Bear.
"But let me tell you that it's because of the iron that men have become so much wiser than we bears.
For this alone, if for nothing else, I should like to put a stop to the work here."
Again the boy endeavoured to think out a plan of escape, but his thoughts wandered, willy nilly. They were taken up with the iron.
And gradually he began to comprehend how much thinking and calculating men must have done before they discovered how to produce iron from ore, and he seemed to see sooty blacksmiths of old bending over the forge, pondering how they should properly handle it.
Perhaps it was because they had thought so much about the iron that intelligence had been developed in mankind, until finally they became so advanced that they were able to build great works like these.
The fact was that men owed more to the iron than they themselves knew.
"Well, what say you?
Will you or won't you?"
insisted Father Bear.
The boy shrank back.
Here he stood thinking needless thoughts, and had no idea as to what he should do to save himself.
"It's not such an easy matter to decide as you think," he answered.
"You must give me time for reflection."
"I can wait for you a little longer," said Father Bear. "But after that you'll get no more grace. You must know that it's the fault of the iron that the human kind can live here on the property of the bears.
And now you understand why I would be rid of the work."
The boy meant to use the last moment to think out some way to save himself, but, anxious and distraught as he was, his thoughts wandered again. Now he began thinking of all that he had seen when he flew over the mining districts.
It was strange that there should be so much life and activity and so much work back there in the wilderness.
"Just think how poor and desolate this place would be had there been no iron here!
"This very foundry gave employment to many, and had gathered around it many homes filled with people, who, in turn, had attracted hither railways and telegraph wires and&#8212;"
"Come, come!"
growled the bear.
"Will you or won't you?"
The boy swept his hand across his forehead.
No plan of escape had as yet come to his mind, but this much he knew&#8212;he did not wish to do any harm to the iron, which was so useful to rich and poor alike, and which gave bread to so many people in this land.
"I won't!"
he said.
Father Bear squeezed him a little harder, but said nothing.
"You'll not get me to destroy the ironworks!"
defied the boy.
"The iron is so great a blessing that it will never do to harm it."
"Then of course you don't expect to be allowed to live very long?"
said the bear.
"No, I don't expect it," returned the boy, looking the bear straight in the eye.
Father Bear gripped him still harder.
It hurt so that the boy could not keep the tears back, but he did not cry out or say a word.
"Very well, then," said Father Bear, raising his paw very slowly, hoping that the boy would give in at the last moment.
But just then the boy heard something click very close to them, and saw the muzzle of a rifle two paces away.
Both he and Father Bear had been so engrossed in their own affairs they had not observed that a man had stolen right upon them.
"Father Bear!
Don't you hear the clicking of a trigger?"
cried the boy.
"Run, or you'll be shot!"
Father Bear grew terribly hurried.
However, he allowed himself time enough to pick up the boy and carry him along.
As he ran, a couple of shots sounded, and the bullets grazed his ears, but, luckily, he escaped.
The boy thought, as he was dangling from the bear's mouth, that never had he been so stupid as he was to-night. If he had only kept still, the bear would have been shot, and he himself would have been freed.
But he had become so accustomed to helping the animals that he did it naturally, and as a matter of course.
When Father Bear had run some distance into the woods, he paused and set the boy down on the ground.
"Thank you, little one!" he said. "I dare say those bullets would have caught me if you hadn't been there. And now I want to do you a service in return.
If you should ever meet with another bear, just say to him this&#8212;which I shall whisper to you&#8212;and he won't touch you."
Father Bear whispered a word or two into the boy's ear and hurried away, for he thought he heard hounds and hunters pursuing him.
The boy stood in the forest, free and unharmed, and could hardly understand how it was possible.
The wild geese had been flying back and forth the whole evening, peering and calling, but they had been unable to find Thumbietot.
They searched long after the sun had set, and, finally, when it had grown so dark that they were forced to alight somewhere for the night, they were very downhearted.
There was not one among them but thought the boy had been killed by the fall and was lying dead in the forest, where they could not see him.
But the next morning, when the sun peeped over the hills and awakened the wild geese, the boy lay sleeping, as usual, in their midst.
When he woke and heard them shrieking and cackling their astonishment, he could not help laughing.
They were so eager to know what had happened to him that they did not care to go to breakfast until he had told them the whole story.
The boy soon narrated his entire adventure with the bears, but after that he seemed reluctant to continue.
"How I got back to you perhaps you already know?"
he said.
"No, we know nothing.
We thought you were killed."
"That's curious!" remarked the boy. "Oh, yes!&#8212;when Father Bear left me I climbed up into a pine and fell asleep. At daybreak I was awakened by an eagle hovering over me. He picked me up with his talons and carried me away.
He didn't hurt me, but flew straight here to you and dropped me down among you."
"Didn't he tell you who he was?"
asked the big white gander.
"He was gone before I had time even to thank him.
I thought that Mother
Akka had sent him after me."
"How extraordinary!"
exclaimed the white goosey-gander.
"But are you certain that it was an eagle?"
"I had never before seen an eagle," said the boy, "but he was so big and splendid that I can't give him a lowlier name!"
Morten Goosey-Gander turned to the wild geese to hear what they thought of this; but they stood gazing into the air, as though they were thinking of something else.
"We must not forget entirely to eat breakfast today," said Akka, quickly spreading her wings.
THE SWANS
May first to fourth.
There was a terrible storm raging in the district north of Lake Mälar, which lasted several days. The sky was a dull gray, the wind whistled, and the rain beat.
Both people and animals knew the spring could not be ushered in with anything short of this; nevertheless they thought it unbearable.
After it had been raining for a whole day, the snowdrifts in the pine forests began to melt in earnest, and the spring brooks grew lively.
All the pools on the farms, the standing water in the ditches, the water that oozed between the tufts in marshes and swamps - all were in motion and tried to find their way to creeks, that they might be borne along to the sea.
The creeks rushed as fast as possible down to the rivers, and the rivers did their utmost to carry the water to Lake Mälar.
All the lakes and rivers in Uppland and the mining district quickly threw off their ice covers on one and the same day, so that the creeks filled with ice-floes which rose clear up to their banks.
Swollen as they were, they emptied into Lake Mälar, and it was not long before the lake had taken in as much water as it could well hold. Down by the outlet was a raging torrent.
Norrström is a narrow channel, and it could not let out the water quickly enough.
Besides, there was a strong easterly wind that lashed against the land, obstructing the stream when it tried to carry the fresh water into the East Sea.
Since the rivers kept running to Mälaren with more water than it could dispose of, there was nothing for the big lake to do but overflow its banks.
It rose very slowly, as if reluctant to injure its beautiful shores; but as they were mostly low and gradually sloping, it was not long before the water had flooded several acres of land, and that was enough to create the greatest alarm.
Lake Mälar is unique in its way, being made up of a succession of narrow fiords, bays, and inlets. In no place does it spread into a storm centre, but seems to have been created only for pleasure trips, yachting tours, and fishing.
Nowhere does it present barren, desolate, wind-swept shores.
It looks as if it never thought that its shores could hold anything but country seats, summer villas, manors, and amusement resorts.
But, because it usually presents a very agreeable and friendly appearance, there is all the more havoc whenever it happens to drop its smiling expression in the spring, and show that it can be serious.
At that critical time Smirre Fox happened to come sneaking through a birch grove just north of Lake Mälar.
As usual, he was thinking of Thumbietot and the wild geese, and wondering how he should ever find them again.
He had lost all track of them.
As he stole cautiously along, more discouraged than usual, he caught sight of Agar, the carrier-pigeon, who had perched herself on a birch branch.
"My, but I'm in luck to run across you, Agar!"
exclaimed Smirre.
"Maybe you can tell me where Akka from Kebnekaise and her flock hold forth nowadays?"
"It's quite possible that I know where they are," Agar hinted, "but I'm not likely to tell you!"
"Please yourself!" retorted Smirre. "Nevertheless, you can take a message that I have for them. You probably know the present condition of Lake Mälar? There's a great overflow down there and all the swans who live in Hjälsta Bay are about to see their nests, with all their eggs, destroyed.
Daylight, the swan-king, has heard of the midget who travels with the wild geese and knows a remedy for every ill.
He has sent me to ask Akka if she will bring Thumbietot down to Hjälsta Bay."
"I dare say I can convey your message," Agar replied, "but I can't understand how the little boy will be able to help the swans."
"Nor do I," said Smirre, "but he can do almost everything, it seems."
"It's surprising to me that Daylight should send his messages by a fox," Agar remarked.
"Well, we're not exactly what you'd call good friends," said Smirre smoothly, "but in an emergency like this we must help each other. Perhaps it would be just as well not to tell Akka that you got the message from a fox.
Between you and me, she's inclined to be a little suspicious."
The safest refuge for water-fowl in the whole Mälar district is Hjälsta Bay.
It has low shores, shallow water and is also covered with reeds.
It is by no means as large as Lake Tåkern, but nevertheless Hjälsta is a good retreat for birds, since it has long been forbidden territory to hunters.
It is the home of a great many swans, and the owner of the old castle nearby has prohibited all shooting on the bay, so that they might be unmolested.
As soon as Akka received word that the swans needed her help, she hastened down to Hjälsta Bay. She arrived with her flock one evening and saw at a glance that there had been a great disaster.
The big swans' nests had been torn away, and the strong wind was driving them down the bay.
Some had already fallen apart, two or three had capsized, and the eggs lay at the bottom of the lake.
When Akka alighted on the bay, all the swans living there were gathered near the eastern shore, where they were protected from the wind.
Although they had suffered much by the flood, they were too proud to let any one see it.
"It is useless to cry," they said.
"There are plenty of root-fibres and stems here; we can soon build new nests."
None had thought of asking a stranger to help them, and the swans had no idea that Smirre Fox had sent for the wild geese!
There were several hundred swans resting on the water. They had placed themselves according to rank and station.
The young and inexperienced were farthest out, the old and wise nearer the middle of the group, and right in the centre sat Daylight, the swan-king, and Snow-White, the swan-queen, who were older than any of the others and regarded the rest of the swans as their children.
The geese alighted on the west shore of the bay; but when Akka saw where the swans were, she swam toward them at once.
She was very much surprised at their having sent for her, but she regarded it as an honour and did not wish to lose a moment in coming to their aid.
As Akka approached the swans she paused to see if the geese who followed her swam in a straight line, and at even distances apart.
"Now, swim along quickly!"
she ordered.
"Don't stare at the swans as if you had never before seen anything beautiful, and don't mind what they may say to you!"
This was not the first time that Akka had called on the aristocratic swans.
They had always received her in a manner befitting a great traveller like herself.
But still she did not like the idea of swimming in among them. She never felt so gray and insignificant as when she happened upon swans. One or another of them was sure to drop a remark about "common gray-feathers" and "poor folk."
But it is always best to take no notice of such things.
This time everything passed off uncommonly well.
The swans politely made way for the wild geese, who swam forward through a kind of passageway, which formed an avenue bordered by shimmering, white birds.
It was a beautiful sight to watch them as they spread their wings, like sails, to appear well before the strangers.
They refrained from making comments, which rather surprised Akka.
Evidently Daylight had noted their misbehaviour in the past and had told the swans that they must conduct themselves in a proper manner - so thought the leader-goose.
But just as the swans were making an effort to observe the rules of etiquette, they caught sight of the goosey-gander, who swam last in the long goose-line.
Then there was a murmur of disapproval, even of threats, among the swans, and at once there was an end to their good deportment!
"What's this?"
shrieked one.
"Do the wild geese intend to dress up in white feathers?"
"They needn't think that will make swans of them," cried another.
They began shrieking - one louder than another - in their strong, resonant voices.
It was impossible to explain that a tame goosey-gander had come with the wild geese.
"That must be the goose-king himself coming along," they said tauntingly.
"There's no limit to their audacity!"
"That's no goose, it's only a tame duck."
The big white gander remembered Akka's admonition to pay no attention, no matter what he might hear.
He kept quiet and swam ahead as fast he could, but it did no good.
The swans became more and more impertinent.
"What kind of a frog does he carry on his back?"
asked one.
"They must think we don't see it's a frog because it is dressed like a human being."
The swans, who but a moment before had been resting in such perfect order, now swam up and down excitedly.
All tried to crowd forward to get a glimpse of the white wild goose.
"That white goosey-gander ought to be ashamed to come here and parade before swans!"
"He's probably as gray as the rest of them.
He has only been in a flour barrel at some farm house!"
Akka had just come up to Daylight and was about to ask him what kind of help he wanted of her, when the swan-king noticed the uproar among the swans.
"What do I see?
Haven't I taught you to be polite to strangers?"
he said with a frown.
Snow-White, the swan-queen, swam out to restore order among her subjects, and again Daylight turned to Akka.
Presently Snow-White came back, appearing greatly agitated.
"Can't you keep them quiet?"
shouted Daylight.
"There's a white wild goose over there," answered Snow-White.
"Is it not shameful?
I don't wonder they are furious!"
"A white wild goose?"
scoffed Daylight.
"That's too ridiculous!
There can't be such a thing.
You must be mistaken."
The crowds around Morten Goosey-Gander grew larger and larger.
Akka and the other wild geese tried to swim over to him, but were jostled hither and thither and could not get to him.
The old swan-king, who was the strongest among them, swam off quickly, pushed all the others aside, and made his way over to the big white gander.
But when he saw that there really was a white goose on the water, he was just as indignant as the rest.
He hissed with rage, flew straight at Morten Goosey-Gander and tore out a few feathers.
"I'll teach you a lesson, wild goose," he shrieked, "so that you'll not come again to the swans, togged out in this way!"
"Fly, Morten Goosey-Gander!
Fly, fly!"
cried Akka, for she knew that otherwise the swans would pull out every feather the goosey-gander had.
"Fly, fly!"
screamed Thumbietot, too.
But the goosey-gander was so hedged in by the swans that he had not room enough to spread his wings.
All around him the swans stretched their long necks, opened their strong bills, and plucked his feathers.
Morten Goosey-Gander defended himself as best he could, by striking and biting.
The wild geese also began to fight the swans.
It was obvious how this would have ended had the geese not received help quite unexpectedly.
A red-tail noticed that they were being roughly treated by the swans.
Instantly he cried out the shrill call that little birds use when they need help to drive off a hawk or a falcon.
Three calls had barely sounded when all the little birds in the vicinity came shooting down to Hjälsta Bay, as if on wings of lightning.
These delicate little creatures swooped down upon the swans, screeched in their ears, and obstructed their view with the flutter of their tiny wings.
They made them dizzy with their fluttering and drove them to distraction with their cries of "Shame, shame, swans!"
The attack of the small birds lasted but a moment.
When they were gone and the swans came to their senses, they saw that the geese had risen and flown over to the other end of the bay.
THE NEW WATCH-DOG
There was this at least to be said in the swans' favour - when they saw that the wild geese had escaped, they were too proud to chase them.
Moreover, the geese could stand on a clump of reeds with perfect composure, and sleep.
Nils Holgersson was too hungry to sleep.
"It is necessary for me to get something to eat," he said.
At that time, when all kinds of things were floating on the water, it was not difficult for a little boy like Nils Holgersson to find a craft. He did not stop to deliberate, but hopped down on a stump that had drifted in amongst the reeds.
Then he picked up a little stick and began to pole toward shore.
Just as he was landing, he heard a splash in the water. He stopped short.
First he saw a lady swan asleep in her big nest quite close to him, then he noticed that a fox had taken a few steps into the water and was sneaking up to the swan's nest.
"Hi, hi, hi!
Get up, get up!"
cried the boy, beating the water with his stick.
The lady swan rose, but not so quickly but that the fox could have pounced upon her had he cared to.
However, he refrained and instead hurried straight toward the boy.
Thumbietot saw the fox coming and ran for his life.
Wide stretches of meadow land spread before him.
He saw no tree that he could climb, no hole where he might hide; he just had to keep running.
The boy was a good runner, but it stands to reason that he could not race with a fox!
Not far from the bay there were a number of little cabins, with candle lights shining through the windows.
Naturally the boy ran in that direction, but he realized that long before he could reach the nearest cabin the fox would catch up to him.
Once the fox was so close that it looked as if the boy would surely be his prey, but Nils quickly sprang aside and turned back toward the bay.
By that move the fox lost time, and before he could reach the boy the latter had run up to two men who were on their way home from work.
The men were tired and sleepy; they had noticed neither boy nor fox, although both had been running right in front of them.
Nor did the boy ask help of the men; he was content to walk close beside them.
"Surely the fox won't venture to come up to the men," he thought.
But presently the fox came pattering along.
He probably counted on the men taking him for a dog, for he went straight up to them.
"Whose dog can that be sneaking around here?"
queried one.
"He looks as though he were ready to bite."
The other paused and glanced back.
"Go along with you!"
he said, and gave the fox a kick that sent it to the opposite side of the road.
"What are you doing here?"
After that the fox kept at a safe distance, but followed all the while.
Presently the men reached a cabin and entered it. The boy intended to go in with them; but when he got to the stoop he saw a big, shaggy watch-dog rush out from his kennel to greet his master.
Suddenly the boy changed his mind and remained out in the open.
"Listen, watch-dog!"
whispered the boy as soon as the men had shut the door.
"I wonder if you would like to help me catch a fox to-night?"
The dog had poor eyesight and had become irritable and cranky from being chained.
"What, I catch a fox?"
he barked angrily.
"Who are you that makes fun of me?
You just come within my reach and I'll teach you not to fool with me!"
"You needn't think that I'm afraid to come near you!"
said the boy, running up to the dog.
When the dog saw him he was so astonished that he could not speak.
"I'm the one they call Thumbietot, who travels with the wild geese," said the boy, introducing himself.
"Haven't you heard of me?"
"I believe the sparrows have twittered a little about you," the dog returned.
"They say that you have done wonderful things for one of your size."
"I've been rather lucky up to the present," admitted the boy.
"But now it's all up with me unless you help me!
There's a fox at my heels.
He's lying in wait for me around the corner."
"Don't you suppose I can smell him?"
retorted the dog.
"But we'll soon be rid of him!"
With that the dog sprang as far as the chain would allow, barking and growling for ever so long.
"Now I don't think he will show his face again to-night!"
said the dog.
"It will take something besides a fine bark to scare that fox!"
the boy remarked.
"He'll soon be here again, and that is precisely what I wish, for I have set my heart on your catching him."
"Are you poking fun at me now?"
asked the dog.
"Only come with me into your kennel, and I'll tell you what to do."
The boy and the watch-dog crept into the kennel and crouched there, whispering.
By and by the fox stuck his nose out from his hiding place.
When all was quiet he crept along cautiously.
He scented the boy all the way to the kennel, but halted at a safe distance and sat down to think of some way to coax him out.
Suddenly the watch-dog poked his head out and growled at him:
"Go away, or I'll catch you!"
"I'll sit here as long as I please for all of you!"
defied the fox.
"Go away!"
repeated the dog threateningly, "or there will be no more hunting for you after to-night."
But the fox only grinned and did not move an inch.
"I know how far your chain can reach," he said.
"I have warned you twice," said the dog, coming out from his kennel.
"Now blame yourself!"
With that the dog sprang at the fox and caught him without the least effort, for he was loose.
The boy had unbuckled his collar.
There was a hot struggle, but it was soon over.
The dog was the victor.
The fox lay on the ground and dared not move.
"Don't stir or I'll kill you!" snarled the dog. Then he took the fox by the scruff of the neck and dragged him to the kennel. There the boy was ready with the chain.
He placed the dog collar around the neck of the fox, tightening it so that he was securely chained.
During all this the fox had to lie still, for he was afraid to move.
"Now, Smirre Fox, I hope you'll make a good watch-dog," laughed the boy when he had finished.