Dorothy lived in the middle of the Kansas prairies with Uncle Henry, a farmer, and Aunt Em, his wife.
They had a small house with four walls, a floor, and a roof.
The only cellar was a small hole dug in the ground, called a cyclone cellar.
When Dorothy stood in the door and looked outside, she saw only the gray prairie all around.
There weren't any trees or other houses.
The land was baked by the sun and had little cracks through it and the grass was burned.
Dorothy was an orphan when she came to live with Aunt Em and Uncle Henry, who didn't laugh.
It was Toto, a little black dog with silky hair and twinkling eyes, who made Dorothy laugh.
The two played all day together and she loved him.
Today, however, they were not playing.
Uncle Henry sat upon the doorstep and looked at the sky, which was even grayer than usual.
Dorothy stood in the door with Toto in her arms and looked at the sky, too.
Aunt Em was washing the dishes.
From the far north they heard a low wail of the wind.
Uncle Henry and Dorothy could see where the long grass bowed in waves before the coming storm.
There now came a sharp whistling from the south, and as they turned their eyes that way they saw ripples in the grass coming from that direction.
"There's a cyclone coming, Em!"
Uncle Henry suddenly shouted.
He ran off toward the cows and horses.
Aunt Em shouted, "Quick, Dorothy!
Run for the cellar!"
Toto jumped out of Dorothy's arms and ran under the bed.
Aunt Em threw open the trapdoor in the floor and climbed into the dark hole.
Dorothy grabbed Toto and ran after her.
Suddenly a great shriek came from the wind and the house shook, throwing Dorothy to the floor.
Then, a strange thing happened.
The house whirled and rose in the air into the exact center of the cyclone.
It took the house higher and higher until it was at the top and carried the house miles away.
It was dark and the wind howled horribly.
As the house settled in the tornado, Dorothy felt as if she were being rocked gently.
Toto ran around the room and barked.
Dorothy waited to see what would happen.
Hours passed.
Dorothy felt lonely and the wind was so loud it hurt her ears.
After hours more, she crawled to her bed and lay down.
Toto lay down beside her.
As the house swayed and the wind howled, Dorothy closed her eyes and fell asleep.
If Dorothy hadn't been on the bed, the strong shock that woke her might have hurt her.
Instead, it made her catch her breath.
Toto whined.
The house had stopped moving and it wasn't dark.
Bright sunshine came in the window.
Dorothy jumped up and opened the door.
"Oh my!" she cried as she looked at the wonderful sights.
The cyclone had set the house down gently in a beautiful country.
Green grass was everywhere and tall trees full of fruit were surrounded by flowers.
Bright birds sang in the trees.
A small stream rushed along green banks.
As Dorothy looked at the beautiful sights, a group of the strangest people she'd ever seen came toward her.
They were about as tall as her, but many years older.
Three men and one woman came, all oddly dressed.
Their round hats were pointed and had little bells that rang sweetly.
The woman wore a white hat and gown, full of little stars that glistened in the sun.
Dorothy decided the men were about as old as Uncle Henry.
The woman had to be much older.
Her face was covered with wrinkles and her hair was almost white.
The woman walked up to Dorothy and bowed.
"You are welcome, great Sorceress, to the land of the Munchkins.
We thank you for killing the Wicked Witch of the East and freeing us from her slavery."
Dorothy did not understand what she was talking about.
She wasn't a sorceress and had never killed anything.
Dorothy said, "There must be a mistake."
The little old woman laughed.
"Your house killed her.
See!"
Dorothy looked where she pointed and screamed.
Under the corner of the house two feet stuck out wearing silver shoes with pointed toes.
"Oh dear!" she cried. "
The house fell on her.
Who was she?"
"She was the Wicked Witch of the East," the little woman said.
"She makes the Munchkins slave for her day and night.
Now they are set free because of you."
"Who are the Munchkins?"
Dorothy asked.
"They are the people in this land of the East," the woman said.
"I am their friend from the North.
I am the Witch of the North."
Dorothy shouted, "Are you a real witch?"
"Yes. I am a good witch and the people love me."
She explained that there were four witches in the Land of Oz.
The two from the North and South were good, but the ones in the East and West were wicked.
"Now there is only one evil witch in all of Oz," she said.
"My Aunt Em in Kansas
- where I am from
- said witches are all dead."
The Witch of the North thought for a moment.
"I don't know where Kansas is, but is it a civilized country?"
"Yes," replied Dorothy.
"Oh," the woman said.
"The Land of Oz is not civilized.
It's cut off from the rest of the world.
We still have witches and wizards."
"Who are the wizards?"
Dorothy asked.
"Oz is the Great Wizard," the good witch said.
"He is more powerful than all of us and lives in the City of Emeralds."
Suddenly the Munchkins shouted and pointed to the house.
The little old woman laughed.
The dead witch's feet had disappeared and only left the silver shoes.
"That is the end of her.
The shoes are yours and you shall wear them."
The good witch dusted them off and gave them to Dorothy.
"There is a charm with them, but what it is we never knew."
Dorothy told them how much she wanted to get back to her aunt and uncle. "
Can you help me find the way?"
Dorothy asked.
None of them knew how and told her of great deserts all around.
"I'm afraid you'll have to live with us," the good witch said.
Dorothy began to cry.
Her tears upset the kind Munchkins and they began to cry also.
The little old woman took off her cap, balanced it on her nose, and counted to three.
The cap changed to a board which had written on it: Let Dorothy go to the City of Emeralds.
"Is your name Dorothy?
" she asked.
"Yes," Dorothy said.
"Then go to the City of Emeralds.
Oz may be able to help you."
Dorothy asked where the city was.
The witch told her that it was in the center of the country, ruled by the Great Wizard.
When Dorothy asked if he was a good man, she was told that he was a good wizard.
"I do not know if he is a man or not.
I've never seen him," the good witch said.
"It is a long journey to walk.
It will be pleasant at times, but dark and terrible as well."
Dorothy wanted the old woman to go along, but she said she could only give her a kiss on the forehead. "
No one can injure a person kissed by me."
The witch continued, "The road to the city is yellow brick.
Do not be afraid to ask him for help.
Good-bye."
The Munchkins bowed and walked away, while the witch nodded to Dorothy.
Then she whirled on her left heel three times and disappeared.
Dorothy was hungry and went to find food and water for her and Toto.
She found bread in the house, clear water in the stream, and fruit hanging from the trees.
She then changed into her only clean dress and bonnet.
The dress had checks of white and blue.
She took a little basket with bread in it.
She looked at her feet and saw how old her shoes were.
"They are not good for a long journey, Toto," she said.
She picked up the silver shoes from the Witch of the East and put them on.
Dorothy took the basket and said, "Come, Toto, let's ask the Great Oz to get us back to Kansas."
She locked the door and put the key in a pocket in her dress.
With Toto behind her, she started on her journey.
There were several roads, but only one was yellow brick.
The country around her was pretty, full of neat fences and fields of grain and vegetables.
Sometimes she would pass a house where people came out to bow at the girl who killed the Wicked Witch of the East.
That evening, Dorothy was tired and wondered where she would sleep.
She found a house where the people greeted her kindly.
They were having a party to celebrate freedom from the Wicked Witch.
Dorothy ate and slept well.
The next morning she asked how far it was to the Emerald City.
"It is a long way and will take you many days," one Munchkin said.
This worried Dorothy, but she knew that only the Great Oz could help her get home.
She told her new friends good-bye.
When she had walked several miles, she stopped to rest at a fence next to a large cornfield.
She saw a scarecrow not far away, high on a pole.
His head was a sack stuffed with straw that had eyes, a nose, and a mouth painted on.
An old, pointed blue hat was on his head and he wore faded blue clothes and old blue boots.
As Dorothy stared at him, she was surprised to see one of his eyes slowly wink.
None of the scarecrows in Kansas ever winked.
Then, he nodded to her.
She walked over to him while Toto ran around the pole and barked.
"Good day," the Scarecrow said.
"Did you speak?"
Dorothy asked.
"Certainly!" the Scarecrow answered.
"How do you do?"
"Pretty well," Dorothy said.
"How do you do?"
"Not very well," the Scarecrow said.
"It's tiring being up here all night and day."
"Can't you get down?" asked Dorothy.
The Scarecrow explained that the pole was stuck in his back.
He asked if she could take it away.
Dorothy reached up and lifted him off the pole.
"Thank you," he said.
"I feel like a new man."
Dorothy was surprised to hear the stuffed man speak as he walked along beside her.
"Who are you and where are you going?" he asked.
"My name is Dorothy," she said.
"I'm going to the Emerald City to ask the Great Oz to send me back to Kansas."
The Scarecrow did not know anything about what she said.
"I am stuffed, so I have no brains," he said sadly.
"
Do you think if I go with you that Oz would give me some brains?"
the Scarecrow asked.
"I don't know," she said.
"But you can come with me.
If he doesn't, you will be no worse than now."
The Scarecrow agreed.
"I cannot get hurt, but I do not want people to call me a fool.
With straw instead of brains, how will I ever know anything?"
They walked along the yellow brick road.
At first Toto did not like the scarecrow, and sometimes he growled.
"He never bites," Dorothy said.
"I'm not afraid," said the Scarecrow.
"He can't hurt the straw.
I'll tell you a secret.
There is only one thing in the world that I fear."
"What?"
Dorothy asked.
The Scarecrow said, "A lighted match."
The road became harder to walk on.
Sometimes the yellow bricks were broken or missing and the Scarecrow, having no brains, fell over them.
Dorothy would pick him up and they would both laugh.
There were fewer houses and fruit trees as they walked along.
At noon they stopped to rest.
Dorothy pulled bread from her basket.
The Scarecrow explained he was never hungry.
"Tell me about yourself and your country," he said to Dorothy.
She told him about Kansas and how gray it was and how the cyclone brought her to Oz.
The Scarecrow could not understand why she'd want to leave beautiful Oz for such a gray place.
"That's because you have no brains," she said.
"There is no place like home.
Now, will you tell me a story?"
The Scarecrow said, "I was only made the day before yesterday.
Luckily the farmer painted my ears first
so I could hear.
The farmer painted my face and said I would scare crows fast and that I was just like a man.
I agreed with him.
"When he walked away, I did not like to be left alone, but I could not get down from the pole.
After a while, crows came and ate the corn.
One said, 'The farmer thought to fool us, but any crow could see you are only stuffed with straw.'"
The Scarecrow added, "I felt sad, but the crow said, 'If only you had brains.
They are the only thing worth having in this world.'"
Dorothy smiled when he said it was good luck that she came along to take him off the stick.
"I'm sure the Great Oz will give me brains."
"I hope so," Dorothy said.
That evening they came to a huge forest full of big trees.
Their branches covered the road.
Soon they found themselves in darkness.
The Scarecrow said he could see the same in the dark or day, so Dorothy took hold of his arm.
When the Scarecrow saw a little cottage, they went inside.
Dorothy and Toto lay down on a bed of dried leaves and fell asleep.
The Scarecrow, who was never tired, stood in a corner and waited patiently until morning.
When Dorothy woke, she told the Scarecrow they needed to search for water.
"Why?" he asked.
"To wash my face and to drink," Dorothy said.
They found a spring nearby.
Dorothy drank and ate.
There was not much bread left in the basket and Dorothy was glad the Scarecrow did not eat.
As they went back to the yellow brick road, she heard a groan from behind them.
They walked through the trees and found something shining in a ray of sunshine.
Dorothy stopped with a shout of surprise.
Standing beside a tree that was partly chopped down was a man made of tin.
He held an ax raised in his hands.
He did not move.
Dorothy and the Scarecrow stared at him while Toto barked.
"Did you groan?" asked Dorothy.
"Yes," answered the tin man.
"I've been groaning for more than a year for help."
Dorothy listened to his sad voice.
"What can I do?"
"Get an oilcan and oil my joints," he said.
"They rusted and I cannot move.
There is an oilcan in my cottage."
Dorothy found the oilcan and ran back.
"Oil my neck first," said the Tin Woodman.
She did and the Scarecrow carefully moved the man's head from side to side.
"Now oil the joints in my arms," he said.
The Tin Woodman sighed as the Scarecrow bent them until he could lower his ax.
"I've been holding that ax ever since I rusted.
Please oil my legs," he said.
Soon he could move.
He thanked them again and again.
"I might have stood there forever if you didn't come along and save my life."
"We are on our way to Oz," Dorothy said.
"I want him to send me back to Kansas and the Scarecrow wants brains in his head."
"Do you think he could give me a heart?" the Tin Woodman asked.
Dorothy said if he could help the Scarecrow, why not the Tin Woodman, too?
The Tin Woodman decided he would travel with them.
The Scarecrow and Dorothy were happy to have him.
"Will you keep my oilcan in your basket?" he asked Dorothy.
"If I get caught in rain, I will rust again."
When they came to a place where the tree branches were too thick, the Tin Woodman chopped a way through them.
When the Scarecrow fell, the Woodman asked why he didn't walk around the hole.
"My head is full of straw," the Scarecrow said.
"Brains aren't the best thing in the world," the Tin Woodman said.
"Once I had brains and a heart.
I would rather have the heart."
As they walked through the forest, the Tin Woodman told them his story.
"I was born the son of a woodman.
After my father died, I took care of my mother until she died.
Then I decided to marry so I wouldn't be lonely.
I fell in love with a beautiful Munchkin girl.
She promised to marry me if I built a better house.
But the old woman she lived with didn't want her to marry anyone, so she went to the Wicked Witch of the East.
The Witch put a spell on my ax and it slipped and cut off my left leg."
The Tin Woodman showed them his leg.
"I went to a tinsmith and had him make me a new leg.
The Wicked Witch had promised the old woman I wouldn't marry the girl.
As I chopped, my ax slipped and cut off my right leg.
I went to the tinner for another tin leg.
Then the enchanted ax cut off my arms and I had them replaced with tin.
Then the Witch made the ax slip and cut off my head.
The tinner came along and made me a new head of tin.
"I thought I beat the Witch then and I worked harder.
But she found a new, cruel way to kill my love for the beautiful Munchkin girl.
The ax cut right through my body.
The tinner came to help.
He fastened my tin arms and legs and head to the body of tin.
But, now I had no heart and lost all my love for the girl.
I did not care if I married."
Dorothy gasped.
"My body shone bright in the sun and I was proud of it," the Tin Woodman continued.
"The only danger was that my joints would rust, so I kept an oilcan in the cottage.
One day, I forgot to oil my joints and was caught in a rainstorm.
I was left in the woods until you came to help.
"As I waited, I had time to think that the greatest loss I ever had was my heart.
I was the happiest man on earth while I was in love, but no one can love someone who doesn't have a heart.
If Oz will give me a new heart - "
"I will still ask for brains instead of a heart," the Scarecrow said.
"A fool would not know what to do with a heart if he had one."
"I would rather have the heart," said the Tin Woodman.
"Brains do not make a person happy, and happiness is the best thing in the world."
Dorothy wasn't sure which of her friends was right.
She decided if she could get back to Kansas and Aunt Em, it didn't matter if the Woodman or Scarecrow got what they wanted.
What worried her most was that the bread was gone.
She knew the Scarecrow and Tin Woodman didn't eat anything, but she and Toto weren't made of tin or straw and could not live if they didn't have food.
As Dorothy and her friends walked through the thick woods, the yellow brick road was covered with branches and leaves.
Sometimes a deep growl came from behind the trees.
Dorothy did not know what made the sounds, but Toto knew and walked close to Dorothy.
"How long before we are out of the forest?"
Dorothy asked.
The Tin Woodman said, "I don't know since I've never been to the Emerald City.
But my father said it was a long and dangerous journey."
There came a terrible roar from the forest.
The next moment, a great lion jumped into the road.
With one swipe of his paw he sent the Scarecrow spinning and then struck the Tin Woodman with his claws.
The Woodman fell over in the road and lay still.
Toto ran and barked at the Lion.
The beast opened his mouth to bite the dog.
Dorothy rushed forward and slapped the Lion on his nose as hard as she could.
"Don't you dare bite Toto!"
Dorothy cried.
"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, a big beast like you trying to bite a poor little dog!"
"I didn't bite him," the Lion said, rubbing his nose with his paw.
"You are nothing but a big coward," Dorothy said.
"I know," said the Lion.
"I've always been a coward."
Dorothy said, "Imagine, striking a stuffed man like the poor Scarecrow."
She helped the Scarecrow stand, then helped the Woodman.
"What is that animal you care so much about?" the Lion asked.
"He's my dog, Toto," said Dorothy.
"Is he made of tin or stuffed?" asked the Lion.
"Neither.
He's a ... a ... meat dog," she said.
"Oh, he's very small," the Lion said.
"No one would bite such a small thing except a coward like me."
"What makes you a coward?"
Dorothy asked the large beast.
"I guess I was born that way," said the Lion.
"The other animals expect me to be brave, but whenever they or men come around, I just roar loud and they run away."
"But the King of Beasts should not be a coward," the Scarecrow said.
The Lion wiped away a tear with his paw.
"It makes my life unhappy, but my heart beats fast whenever there is danger."
The Scarecrow told the Lion that he was going to the Great Oz to ask for brains and the Tin Woodman to ask for a heart.
"Do you think Oz could give me courage?" asked the Cowardly Lion.
"As easily as he could give me brains," said the Scarecrow.
"Or give me a heart," said the Tin Woodman.
"Or send me back to Kansas," said Dorothy.
"I would like to go with you.
My life is awful without courage," said the Lion.
Dorothy told him that he was welcome to come.
Once more the group went on their journey.
The Lion walked at Dorothy's side.
Toto didn't approve at first, but after a while he and the Cowardly Lion became good friends.
As they walked, the Tin Woodman stepped on a beetle and killed the creature.
He was unhappy because he was careful not to hurt anything and began to cry.
His jaws rusted shut.
He tried to make Dorothy understand he needed help.
The Lion was also confused.
But the Scarecrow grabbed the oilcan and oiled the Woodman's jaws.
After that, the Tin Woodman was careful not to step on even a tiny ant.
He knew he had no heart and was more careful to never be cruel or unkind.
That night they camped under a large tree.
The Tin Woodman chopped wood and Dorothy built a fire to stay warm.
She and Toto ate the last of their bread.
The Lion went into the forest and found his own supper.
The Scarecrow found nuts for Dorothy's basket.
It took him a long time to pick up the nuts, but he was happy since it kept him away from the fire.
The next morning they started toward the Emerald City.
They had been walking an hour when they came to a large ditch that was very wide and very deep.
None of them could climb down the steep sides.
"What will we do?"
Dorothy asked.
"I don't know," the Tin Woodman said.
The Lion shook his shaggy mane.
But the Scarecrow said, "We can't fly or climb down the ditch.
Then we must stop here."
"I think I can jump over it," the Cowardly Lion said.
"You can carry us over on your back, one at a time," the Scarecrow said.
"I'll try," said the Lion.
"Who goes first?"
The Scarecrow said he would be first.
"If you can't jump over it, Dorothy would be killed or the Tin Woodman dented on the rocks.
But a fall would not hurt me."
"I'm afraid of falling," the Cowardly Lion said, "but I must try.
Get on my back."
The Scarecrow sat on the Lion's back.
The Lion walked to the edge and crouched.
With a great jump, he shot through the air and landed safely on the other side.
He went back for Dorothy and Toto.
She climbed on his back and held on to his mane.
The next minute it was as if she were flying.
Then she was safe on the other side.
Then the Lion got the Tin Woodman.
The forest was very thick on the other side.
They each wondered if they would ever find the end of the woods and see sunshine again.
They soon heard strange noises in the forest.
"This is where the Kalidahs live," the Lion whispered.
"What are the Kalidahs?"
Dorothy asked.
"Monstrous beasts with bodies like bears and heads like tigers," said the Lion.
"They have claws that are long and sharp.
I'm terribly afraid of them."
Suddenly they came to another ditch that was too wide and deep for the Lion to leap over.
The Scarecrow said, "See this big tree by the ditch?
The Tin Woodman can chop it down and it will fall across to the other side.
We can walk across it."
The Lion said, "A great idea!
People would think you have brains in your head instead of straw."
The Woodman chopped the tree almost through.
Then the Lion put his strong legs against it and pushed.
The tree fell across the ditch.
The top branches lay on the other side.
As they started across the strange bridge, they heard a growl.
They saw two beasts with bodies like bears and heads like tigers running at them.
"Cross over, quick!" the Scarecrow cried.
Dorothy held Toto and went first, the Tin Woodman followed, and the Scarecrow came next.
The Lion was afraid, but turned and gave a terrible roar that made Dorothy scream.
The beasts stopped and looked at him in surprise.
But since they were two and bigger, they rushed forward.
The Lion crossed over the tree.
The fierce beasts began to cross, too.
"We are lost," the Lion said.
"Stand close behind and I will fight them as long as I am alive."
The Scarecrow had been thinking about what to do.
He asked the Woodman to chop away the end of the tree on their side.
The Tin Woodman used his ax at once.
Just as the two Kalidahs were nearly across, the tree fell into the ditch with the beasts.
The Cowardly Lion said, "They frightened me so badly that my heart is still beating hard."
"I wish I had a heart to beat," the Tin Woodman said sadly.
They all walked fast to get out of the forest.
In the afternoon, they came to a wide river.
On the other side they saw the yellow brick road running through a beautiful land.
There were green meadows full of flowers.
Trees were all around the road and full of fruit.
"How will we cross the river?"
Dorothy asked.
"Easy," said the Scarecrow.
"
The Tin Woodman must build us a raft."
The Woodman chopped down small trees to build the raft.
The Scarecrow found a tree full of fruit and gave it to Dorothy, who happily ate.
It took the Woodman a long time to make the raft.
That night they slept under the trees.
Dorothy dreamed of the Emerald City and of the good Wizard of Oz, who would send her back home again.
The next morning, they were excited about crossing the lovely land to the Emerald City.
The raft was done and soon they were ready to go.
They used long poles to push the raft.
At first they traveled smoothly, but soon the water pushed them farther from the road.
The water became so deep the poles couldn't reach the bottom.
The Tin Woodman said, "If we can't get to land soon, we'll be carried to the court of the Wicked Witch of the West."
"We must get to the Emerald City," the Scarecrow said.
He pushed so hard on the pole it stuck in the bottom of the river.
Suddenly the raft moved and left the poor Scarecrow holding on to the pole in the middle of the river.
"Good-bye!"
he shouted.
The Tin Woodman began to cry, then stopped so he would not rust.
I am now worse than when I first met Dorothy, the Scarecrow thought.
I will never have any brains.
The raft floated down the stream and the Scarecrow was left far behind.
"Something has to be done to save us," the Lion said.
"I think I can swim to shore and pull the raft if you will hold on to my tail."
The Lion jumped into the water.
The Woodman held on to his tail as he swam toward the shore.
It was hard work, but soon they were pulled out of the current.
Dorothy took the pole and pushed the raft to land.
They were tired when they reached the shore.
They had been taken a long way past the yellow brick road.
After they rested, they walked along the grassy river bank.
The country was beautiful and full of flowers, fruit, and sunshine.
But they could not be happy because of the Scarecrow.
As they walked, the Tin Woodman shouted, "Look!"
The Scarecrow was in the middle of the river holding on to the pole and looking sad and lonely.
They all sat in the grass and stared at him.
They didn't know what to do.
A stork flew by and stopped to rest by the water's edge.
"Who are you and where are you going?" the Stork asked.
"I'm Dorothy," the girl said.
"These are my friends the Tin Woodman and the Cowardly Lion.
We are going to the Emerald City.
But we lost the Scarecrow and don't know how to get him again."
The Stork asked where he was and Dorothy pointed at the river.
The Stork flew to the Scarecrow.
She grabbed him by the arm and carried him back to the bank.
The Scarecrow was happy to be back with his friends.
He hugged them all, even Toto and the Lion.
As they walked along again, they looked at the beautiful flowers that were so thick on the ground.
There were big yellow and white and blue and purple flowers next to large groups of red poppies.
"They are beautiful," Dorothy said.
"When I have brains, I will probably like them better," the Scarecrow said.
"If I had a heart, I would love them," said the Woodman.
"I always liked flowers," the Lion said.
"There aren't any in the forest as bright as these."
Soon they found more and more poppies and less of the other flowers.
The whole meadow was filled with them.
It is well known that when there are many of these flowers together, their smell is so strong that anyone who breathes it falls asleep.
If the sleeper isn't carried away from the smell, they sleep forever.
But Dorothy did not know this.
Soon her eyes became heavy and she felt she had to sit down to rest.
The Woodman would not let her.
"We have to hurry and get back to the yellow brick road before dark," he said.
The Scarecrow agreed.
They kept walking until Dorothy could stand no longer.
Her eyes closed.
She fell in the poppies, fast asleep.
"She'll die if we leave her here," the Lion said.
"The smell is killing us all.
I can barely keep my eyes open and the dog is already asleep."
Toto had fallen asleep beside Dorothy.
But the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were not bothered by the flowers.
"Run fast," the Scarecrow told the Lion.
"We can carry Dorothy, but if you fall asleep we cannot carry you."
The Lion ran until he was out of sight.
The Scarecrow and Woodman picked up Toto and Dorothy by making a chair with their hands.
They carried the girl and her dog through the flowers, walking on and on.
It seemed as if the deadly carpet of flowers would never end.
Around a bend in the river, they found the Lion lying fast asleep.
The flowers had been too strong for him.
He had fallen close to the sweet grass in the beautiful field around them.
"We can't do anything for him," the Woodman said.
"He's too heavy.
We have to leave him.
Maybe he'll dream he found courage."
They carried the sleeping Dorothy to a pretty spot away from the poppies.
They laid her gently on the grass and waited for the fresh breeze to wake her up.
Then the Tin Woodman heard a growl.
He saw a yellow wildcat running toward them.
Its ears were lying close to its head and its mouth was wide open as it chased something.
A little gray field mouse was running from the beast.
Even without a heart, the Woodman knew it was wrong for the wildcat to kill the harmless creature.
When the wildcat passed him, the Woodman killed it.
When the mouse saw she was safe
she said in a squeaky voice, "Thank you for saving my life!
I am the Queen of the Field Mice."
The Woodman bowed.
"You have done a great deed," added the Queen.
Other mice ran up to them and bowed to their Queen.
She told them how the Tin Woodman killed the cat. "
You must serve him and obey his wish."
"Is there anything we can do to repay you?" the biggest mouse asked.
"Nothing," the Woodman said.
But the Scarecrow said, "Yes, you can save our friend, the Cowardly Lion, who sleeps in the poppy bed."
"A lion would eat us all!" the Queen shouted.
The Scarecrow told them that he was a coward and would not hurt them.
The Queen agreed to help.
The Scarecrow suggested she could call all her mice to come and bring a long piece of string.
The Queen turned to the mice near her.
They ran in every direction.
The Scarecrow told the Woodman to go to the trees and make a truck out of the tree limbs.
The Woodman put it together with wooden pegs and made four wheels out of pieces of the tree trunk.
By the time the mice came, the truck was ready.
Thousands of mice came from all directions.
Each brought a piece of string in its mouth.
Dorothy woke up from her sleep and was surprised to find herself on the grass with thousands of mice around.
The Scarecrow told her everything.
The Scarecrow and Woodman attached the mice to the truck.
They tied one end of the string around the neck of each mouse and the other to the truck.
When all the mice pulled together, they were able to pull the truck to where the Lion lay asleep.
It took a lot of hard work to get the heavy lion onto the truck.
With the Woodman and Scarecrow pushing from behind, they soon rolled the Lion out of the poppies to the field.
Dorothy thanked the little mice for saving her friend.
The mice were set free and ran away to their homes.
The Queen Mouse said, "If you ever need us again, come into the field and call.
Good-bye!"
They waved good-bye when she left.
Dorothy held tight to Toto
so he wouldn't chase after her.
Then, they waited beside the Lion for him to wake.
It took a long time for the Lion to wake from his sleep.
When he did, they told him how he was rescued by field mice and he laughed.
Dorothy said, "We have to keep going until we find the yellow brick road.
Then we can go to the Emerald City."
Soon they found the road of yellow brick again.
The road was smooth and well paved now.
The country was beautiful and everything seemed to be painted green.
Fences and houses and people's clothes were all green.
No one came out of their houses to talk to them because they were afraid of the Lion.
"This must be the Land of Oz," Dorothy said.
"We have to be getting near the Emerald City."
The Scarecrow said, "The people do not seem as friendly as the Munchkins.
I don't know where we will stay tonight."
Dorothy said, "I wish I could have something else to eat besides fruit.
Toto must be nearly starved."
They went to the next farmhouse and knocked on the door.
A woman peeked out and said, "What do you want, child?
And why is there a lion with you?"
Dorothy asked if they could stay the night. "
The Lion is my friend and will not hurt anyone."
When she promised the woman that the Lion was tame and even a coward, the woman let them come in.
There were other people in the house.
They asked where the strange group was going.
When Dorothy said they were going to the Emerald City to see Oz, a man said, "He never lets anyone come into his presence.
I know of no living person who has seen him."
They were told that Oz sits every day in the great Throne Room and never leaves his palace.
"What is he like?"
Dorothy asked.
The man did not know. "
Oz is a Great Wizard and can look any way he wants.
Some say he looks like a bird, others say an elephant, and some say he looks like a cat.
Others say he looks like a fairy or whatever form pleases him.
But no one knows what the real Oz looks like."
Dorothy explained they had to see him to give the Scarecrow some brains, the Tin Woodman a heart, courage for the Lion, and to send Dorothy back to Kansas.
"Oz can do anything," the man said.
"But first you must see him, and he doesn't let people come in."
Dorothy ate some delicious porridge, some scrambled eggs, and bread.
The Lion ate a little porridge but did not like it.
The Tin Woodman and Scarecrow ate nothing.
Toto ate a little of everything.
The woman gave Dorothy and Toto a bed.
The Lion guarded her room.
The Scarecrow and Tin Woodman stood in a corner since they could not sleep.
The next morning they left the farmhouse.
A green glow in the sky became brighter and brighter.
"That must be the Emerald City."
It was afternoon before they came to a large wall surrounding the city.
It was high and thick and bright green.
In front of the yellow brick road was a large gate full of green emeralds.
Dorothy pushed a bell by the gate.
The big gate swung open and they walked through.
They stood in a tall room where the walls sparkled with emeralds.
A little man about the size of a Munchkin stood in front of them.
His clothes were all in green and even his skin looked green.
There was a large green box at his side.
"What do you wish in the Emerald City?"
Dorothy said, "We came to see the Great Oz."
The man shook his head.
"It's been many years since anyone asked to see Oz.
He is powerful and terrible.
If you bother him about foolish errands, he might be angry and destroy you all."
"But it isn't a foolish errand," the Scarecrow said.
"We have been told that Oz is a Great Wizard."
"He is," the green man said.
"But no one has asked to see his face.
I am the Guardian of the Gates and I must take you to his palace.
First, put on these glasses."
"Why?" Dorothy asked.
The man said, "The bright beauty of the Emerald City would blind you.
Everyone must wear them night and day."
He opened the big box.
Inside were glasses of every shape and size.
The Guardian found a pair to fit Dorothy and put them on her.
Two golden bands went around the back of her head and were locked with a little key.
Dorothy could not take them off.
The green man found glasses for the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman, the Lion, and even Toto.
Then he put on his own glasses.
He took a big golden key and opened another gate.
They followed him through it and into the streets of the Emerald City.
Even with their eyes protected, Dorothy and her friends were dazzled by the brightness of the Emerald City.
The streets were full of beautiful houses built of green marble and full of sparkling emeralds.
The street was of the same green marble and joined together with emeralds.
Even the sky looked green and the sun's rays were green.
There were many people dressed in green clothes with greenish skin.
No one spoke to them.
Everything in the shops was green, even candy and popcorn.
Children paid for green lemonade with green pennies.
The Guardian led them to a big building in the middle of the city.
It was the Palace of Oz.
A soldier stood in front of the door.
He wore a green uniform and had a long, green beard.
"These strangers demand to see the Great Oz," the Guardian of the Gates said.
"I will take your message to him," the soldier said.
The group passed through the palace gates and waited in a big room with green carpet and furniture.
"I will go to the door of the Throne Room and tell Oz you are here," the soldier said.
When he came back he said, "He said that he will see you.
But each one must come in alone and only one can come each day.
I will show you rooms where you can rest."
"Thank you," Dorothy said.
"That is very kind of Oz."
The soldier blew a green whistle.
A young girl with a green silk gown, green hair, and green eyes bowed to Dorothy and said, "Follow me."
Dorothy said good-bye to her friends and took Toto in her arms.
She followed the green girl to a beautiful room with a soft bed.
A tiny fountain in the room shot green perfume into the air.
In the closet were many green dresses that fit Dorothy.
The girl left Dorothy and went back to the others.
The others were not as comfortable with their rooms, but they stayed where they were told.
The next morning the green girl had Dorothy dressed in a pretty green gown.
She tied a green ribbon around Toto's neck.
Then, they walked to the Throne Room of the Great Oz.
When they came to the soldier they spoke to the day before, he told Dorothy, "At first Oz was angry and said I should send you away.
When I told him about your silver shoes, he was very interested.
And when I told him about the mark on your forehead, he said he would see you."
A bell rang and the green girl said, "That is the signal.
You must go into the Throne Room alone."
She opened a little door and Dorothy went into a wonderful place.
It was a big, round room with a high roof.
The walls, ceiling, and floor were covered with large emeralds.
A big throne of green marble stood in the middle of the room.
In the center of the chair was an enormous head with no body, legs, or arms.
There was no hair on the head.
The eyes turned to look at Dorothy.
The mouth moved and a voice said, "I am Oz, the Great and Terrible.
Who are you and why do you seek me?"
Dorothy took courage and said, "I am Dorothy, the Small and Meek.
I've come to you for your help."
The voice said, "Where did you get the silver shoes and the mark on your forehead?"
"I got the shoes from the Wicked Witch of the East.
My house fell on her and killed her," Dorothy said.
"The mark is where the Good Witch of the North kissed me when she sent me to you."
Oz asked, "What do you want me to do?"
"Send me back to Kansas where my Aunt Em and Uncle Henry are," Dorothy answered.
The eyes winked three times.
"Why should I do this for you?"
"Because you are strong and I am weak.
Because you are a Great Wizard
and I am just a little girl."
The Head said, "You have no right to expect me to send you back to Kansas unless you do something for me.
Help me and I will help you."
"What do I need to do?" asked Dorothy.
"Kill the Wicked Witch of the West," Oz said.
"I can't!"
Dorothy shouted in surprise.
"You killed the Witch of the East and wear her shoes.
They have a powerful charm.
When you can tell me the Witch of the West is dead, I will send you back to Kansas."
Dorothy began to cry. "
I've never killed anything on purpose."
"Remember," said the Head, "the Witch is very wicked and should be killed.
Go and do not ask to see me again until it is done."
Dorothy left the Throne Room and went back to where the Lion, the Scarecrow, and the Tin Woodman waited.
"There is no hope for me," she said.
"Oz will not send me home until I kill the Wicked Witch of the West.
I can never do that."
Dorothy went to her room and cried herself to sleep.
The next morning the soldier came to the Scarecrow and said, "Oz has sent for you."
The Scarecrow followed him to the great Throne Room.
On the throne he saw a lovely lady.
She was dressed in green silk.
On her green hair was a crown of jewels.
From her shoulders grew green wings.
They fluttered when the smallest breath of air reached them.
The Scarecrow bowed and the beautiful creature spoke.
"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible.
Who are you and why do you seek me?"
The Scarecrow expected to see a great head.
He answered bravely, "I am only a scarecrow, stuffed with straw.
I have no brains and I come to you asking that you will put brains in my head
so I can become a man like any other."
"Why should I do this for you?" the Lady asked.
"Because you are wise and powerful and no one else can help me," the Scarecrow said.
Oz said, "I promise, if you will kill the Wicked Witch of the West, I will give you a great many good brains that you will be the wisest man in all the Land of Oz."
The Scarecrow was surprised. "
But you asked Dorothy to kill her."
"I don't care who kills her," the Lady said.
"I will not grant your wish until she is dead.
Go and do not come back until you have earned the brains you want."
The Scarecrow went back to his friends and told them what Oz said.
The next morning, the soldier came to the Tin Woodman and said, "Oz has sent for you."
The Tin Woodman followed him to the great Throne Room.
He did not know if he would find the lovely Lady or the Head.
He hoped it was the Lady, for he felt the Head had no heart and would not care, but a lady would be kindhearted.
But when he entered the Throne Room, Oz was a terrible Beast.
It was as big as an elephant with the head of a rhinoceros.
Its face had five eyes.
It had five long arms and five long legs.
Thick, woolly hair covered all of it.
The Tin Woodman was glad he had no heart because it would have beat loud and fast from fear.
"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible," the Beast said.
His voice was a great roar.
"Who are you and why do you seek me?"
"I am a woodman made of tin.
I have no heart and cannot love.
I ask you to give me a heart
so I might be like other men."
"Why should I do this?" shouted the Beast.
"Because only you can grant my wish," the Woodman said.
Oz growled low.
"You must earn it."
"How?" asked the Woodman.
"Help Dorothy kill the Wicked Witch of the West.
When she is dead I will give you the biggest, kindest, and most loving heart in all the land."
The Tin Woodman returned with sadness to his friends.
They wondered about the different forms the Great Wizard could become.
The next morning the soldier led the Lion to the great Throne Room.
The Lion looked around the room and saw on the throne a Ball of Fire.
He could barely look at it.
The heat was so hot it burned his whiskers when he tried to go near.
A quiet voice came from the Ball of Fire.
"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible.
Who are you, and why do you seek me?"
The Lion said, "I am a cowardly lion who is afraid of everything.
I beg you to give me courage
so I may really become the King of Beasts."
"Why should I give you courage?"
Oz asked.
"Because you are the greatest of all wizards and the only one with the power to do this."
The Ball of Fire burned fiercely.
"Bring me proof the Wicked Witch is dead and I will give you courage."
The Lion was angry, but could say nothing.
The Ball of Fire became so hot that the Lion turned tail and ran from the room.
He told his friends of the terrible talk with the Wizard.
"What will we do now?"
Dorothy asked.
"We must go to the land of the Winkies, find the Wicked Witch, and destroy her," the Lion said.
"What if we can't?"
Dorothy asked.
"Then I will never have courage," said the Lion.
"And I will never have brains," said the Scarecrow.
"And I will never have a heart," said the Tin Woodman.
"And I will never see Aunt Em and Uncle Henry," Dorothy said.
She began to cry.
Then she dried her eyes and said, "We must try it.
But I do not want to kill anyone."
"I will go," the Lion said.
"But I am too much of a coward to kill the Witch."
The Scarecrow said, "I will go, but I am too much of a fool to be of much help."
"I haven't the heart to hurt even a Witch," said the Tin Woodman.
"But I will go with you."
They decided to begin their journey the next morning.
The Woodman sharpened his ax and had his joints oiled.
The Scarecrow stuffed himself with fresh straw.
The green girl filled Dorothy's basket with good things to eat and put a little bell around Toto's neck with a green ribbon.
They went to bed early and slept until morning.
They woke at the crowing of a green rooster and the cackling of a hen who laid a green egg.
The green girl took them back to the Guardian of the Gates, who unlocked their glasses and put them in his box.
"Which road leads to the Wicked Witch of the West?"
Dorothy asked.
"There is no road because no one wants to go there," the Guardian said.
"But when she knows you are in the country of the Winkies, she will find you and make you her slaves."
The Scarecrow said, "We plan to destroy her."
The Guardian said, "Be careful.
She is wicked and fierce.
Walk to the west, where the sun sets, and you will find her."
They turned west and walked over fields of soft grass and daisies.
Dorothy still wore the silk dress from the palace.
But now, it wasn't green - it was white.
The ribbon around Toto's neck was white, too.
As they walked, the ground became rougher and hillier.
There were no farms or houses.
The sun shone hot on their faces because there were no trees.
Before night, Dorothy, Toto, and the Lion were tired and fell asleep on the grass.
The Woodman and the Scarecrow watched over them.
The Wicked Witch had only one eye.
It was as powerful as a telescope, so she saw everywhere.
She looked around and saw Dorothy and her friends asleep.
They were still far away, but the Wicked Witch was angry that they were in her country.
She blew a silver whistle.
From all directions a pack of wolves came running.
They had long legs and sharp teeth.
"Tear these people apart," the Witch said.
The wolves ran away at full speed.
When the Scarecrow and Woodman heard the wolves coming, the Woodman said, "Get behind me.
This is my fight."
There were forty wolves and forty times the Tin Woodman raised his ax and killed one.
Finally, he put down his ax and sat beside the Scarecrow.
They waited until Dorothy woke the next morning.
She was afraid when she saw the pile of wolves, but the Woodman told her everything.
She thanked him and they started on their journey again.
When the Wicked Witch saw the wolves lying dead and the strangers still traveling through her land, she became even angrier.
She blew her silver whistle twice.
A flock of wild crows came to her.
The Wicked Witch told the King Crow, "Fly to the strangers and peck them to pieces."
The crows flew in one large flock to Dorothy and her friends.
When she saw them coming, she was afraid.
But the Scarecrow said, "This is my battle.
Lie down beside me."
They all lay on the ground except the Scarecrow.
He stretched his arms.
When the crows saw him, they were frightened and didn't come any closer at first.
But the King Crow said, "It is only a stuffed man.
I will peck out his eyes."
The King Crow flew at the Scarecrow.
He caught it and killed it.
There were forty crows and forty times the Scarecrow killed a crow until they were all dead beside him.
The friends went back to their journey.
The Wicked Witch saw all the crows lying in a heap.
This time she blew three times into her silver whistle.
A large swarm of bees flew toward her.
"Go to the strangers and sting them to death!" the Witch shouted.
The bees flew until they came to Dorothy and her friends.
The Woodman saw them coming and the Scarecrow decided what to do.
"Take out my straw and scatter it over Dorothy, Toto, and the Lion."
The bees came and found no one but the Woodman.
They flew at him and broke off all their stings against the tin.
That was the end of the bees.
They lay around the Woodman in little heaps.
Dorothy and the Woodman put the straw back into the Scarecrow.
They started on their journey once again.
The Witch was so angry she stamped her foot and tore her hair.
She called a dozen of her slaves, who were Winkies.
She gave them sharp spears and told them to destroy the strangers.
They were not very brave, but they marched away until they got near Dorothy.
The Lion gave a mighty roar and jumped at them.
The Winkies were so afraid, they ran as fast as they could.
The Witch could not understand how all her plans had failed.
In her cupboard was a Golden Cap with a circle of diamonds and rubies.
She could use it to call three times on the Winged Monkeys.
The Witch had already called them twice.
She put the cap on her head, stood on her left foot and said slowly, "Ep-pe, pep-pe, kak-ke!"
Then she stood on her right foot. "
Hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!"
Then she stood on both feet and cried, "Ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!"
The sky grew dark and a low, rumbling sound was heard along with a rush of many wings.
Then she heard chattering and laughter.
The sun came out and the Witch was surrounded by monkeys, each with a pair of large, powerful wings.
The largest said to the Witch, "This is your last time to call us.
What do you command?"
"Go to the strangers and destroy them, all except the Lion," said the Witch.
"Bring him to me.
I will make him work like a horse."
The Winged Monkeys flew away to where Dorothy and her friends were walking.
Some seized the Tin Woodman and carried him through the air.
They dropped him over sharp rocks.
He was so dented he could not move.
Other Monkeys caught the Scarecrow and pulled all the straw out of his clothes and head.
They threw his clothes into the top branches of a tall tree.
The rest of the Monkeys threw rope around the Lion until he could not bite or scratch or move.
They lifted him up and flew him to the Witch's castle.
He was put in a small yard with a high fence so he could not escape.
They did not harm Dorothy at all.
She stood with Toto in her arms.
When the leader of the Winged Monkeys saw the mark of the Good Witch's kiss on her forehead, he told the others not to harm her.
They gently lifted her in their arms and carried her to the castle.
The leader said to the Witch, "The Tin Woodman and Scarecrow are destroyed and the Lion tied in your yard.
The girl and her dog we could not hurt.
You will not see us again."
Then the Winged Monkeys flew into the air and were gone.
The Wicked Witch was surprised and worried when she saw the mark on Dorothy.
She knew she could not hurt the girl.
She saw the silver shoes on Dorothy's feet and began to tremble.
She almost ran away, but she looked into the child's eyes and saw the girl did not know the power of the shoes.
She said, "Come with me and do everything I tell you or I will kill you, too."
When they came to the kitchen, the Witch told her to clean the pots and sweep the floor.
Dorothy worked hard as the Witch went to the yard to harness the Cowardly Lion like a horse.
But when she opened the gate the Lion roared and jumped at her.
The Witch ran out and shut the gate.
She decided to starve him.
But every night while she slept, Dorothy brought him food.
They would talk about their troubles and plan a way to escape.
But the castle was constantly guarded by the Winkies, who were afraid of the Witch.
Dorothy was very sad.
She knew it would be harder to get back to Kansas.
The Wicked Witch had a great interest in having the silver shoes.
She had used up many of her powers trying to kill the strangers.
If she got the shoes, she would have more power than all the things she lost.
But Dorothy never took off the shoes.
Being very sneaky, the Witch put an iron bar in the middle of the kitchen floor and made it invisible.
Dorothy tripped over it and fell.
One of her silver shoes fell off and the Witch grabbed it.
She put it on her foot.
"Give me back my shoe!"
Dorothy said.
"No," the Witch said.
"It is my shoe now.
Someday I will get the other one."
This made Dorothy so angry.
She picked up the bucket of water nearby and threw it over the Witch.
The Wicked Witch cried out.
Dorothy watched in surprise as the Witch began to shrink.
"Look what you have done!" she screamed.
"I am melting away!"
"I'm very sorry," Dorothy said.
"Water is the end of me," the Witch cried out.
"In a few minutes I'll be all melted.
I have been wicked, but I never thought a little girl would be able to melt me and end my wicked work.
Here I go!"
Then the Witch fell down in a brown, melted mess all over the floor.
Dorothy filled another bucket of water and threw it over the mess.
She swept it out the door.
After picking up the silver shoe and cleaning it, she put it on her foot.
She ran to the yard to tell the Lion that the Wicked Witch of the West was dead and they were no longer prisoners.
The Cowardly Lion was happy to hear about the Wicked Witch being melted.
Dorothy and the Lion called all the Winkies together to tell them they were no longer slaves.
The Winkies rejoiced at the news.
From then on, that day was a holiday of food and dance.
"If only the Scarecrow and Tin Woodman were with us I'd be very happy," said the Lion.
Dorothy thought they might try to rescue them.
The Winkies said they would be happy to help.
Several went along with Dorothy, Toto, and the Lion.
They traveled a day and a half to find the Tin Woodman.
He was battered and bent.
His ax blade was rusted and the handle broken.
The Winkies lifted him carefully and carried him to the Yellow Castle.
Dorothy cried over her old friend.
Dorothy asked the Winkies to bring any who were tinsmiths.
When they came she asked, "Can you straighten his dents and bend him into shape again?"
The tinsmiths said they thought they could make him good as ever.
They worked for three days and four nights until he was straightened into his old shape.
There were several patches on him, but the tinsmiths did a great job.
When he walked into Dorothy's room, he cried tears of joy.
Dorothy wiped every tear from his face so his joints would not rust.
She cried too, but those tears did not need to be wiped away.
The Lion wiped his eyes so often with this tail that it became wet and he had to hold it in the sun to dry.
"If only we had the Scarecrow with us," the Tin Woodman said.
"I would be very happy."
Dorothy said they must find him, too.
She called the Winkies again.
They walked a day and a half until they came to the tall tree where the Winged Monkeys threw the Scarecrow's clothes.
The Woodman chopped it down with his new ax.
When the tree fell, the clothes rolled onto the ground.
Dorothy picked them up.
The Winkies carried them back to the castle.
They stuffed them with clean straw.
The Scarecrow was as good as ever.
He thanked them over and over.
"We must go back to Oz and make him keep his promise," Dorothy said.
She thought about Aunt Em.
"Yes," said the Woodman.
"I will get my heart."
"And I will get my brains," the Scarecrow said.
The Lion said, "I will get my courage."
"And I will go back to Kansas!"
Dorothy shouted.
The next day they left for the Emerald City.
The Winkies were sad to see them go.
They begged the Tin Woodman to stay and rule over them.
But everyone said they needed to go.
Dorothy found food to fill her basket in the Witch's cupboard.
She also found the Golden Cap and put it on her head.
It fit her and she decided she was going to wear it.
They all started for the Emerald City.
The Winkies gave them three cheers and many good wishes.
Since they had come to the Witch's castle with the flying monkeys, it was much harder to find their way back to the yellow brick road.
They walked until they were lost in the fields.
They walked for days.
And as the days passed, they still saw nothing but fields.
The Scarecrow began to complain.
"We have lost our way and I will never get my brains," he said.
"Or me my heart," said the Tin Woodman.
"I haven't the courage to walk forever," the Cowardly Lion said.
Then Dorothy lost heart.
She sat on the grass and so did her friends.
"We could call the field mice," Dorothy suggested.
"They could tell us the way."
She blew a whistle the Queen of the Mice had given her.
In moments many of the small mice came running, including the Queen.
"What can I do for my friends?
" she asked.
"Can you tell us where the Emerald City is?"
Dorothy asked.
"It is far away," the Queen said.
"Use the charm of the Cap and call the Winged Monkeys.
They will carry you to Oz in less than an hour."
Dorothy was surprised and asked about the Cap.
The Queen told her to look inside for the charm. "
But we must leave first so they don't bother us."
Dorothy looked at the Cap and followed the same directions the Wicked Witch had used.
When she called, the Winged Monkeys flew up to them.
The King bowed to Dorothy.
"What is your command?" he asked.
"We want to go to the Emerald City," she said.
"We will carry you," the King said.
Two of the Monkeys caught Dorothy and flew away.
Others took the Scarecrow and the Woodman and the Lion.
One little Monkey took Toto.
Before long, Dorothy looked down and saw the shining green walls of the Emerald City.
The Monkeys set them down in front of the city's gate.
The King bowed to Dorothy and flew away, followed by the other monkeys.
"That was a good ride," Dorothy said.
The Lion said, "Yes, it was a quick way."
They were happy
Dorothy brought the wonderful Cap.
After ringing the bell at the gate several times, the same Guardian of the Gates opened it.
"You're back again?" he asked.
"I thought you went to visit the Wicked Witch of the West."
"We did," said the Scarecrow.
"She let you go?" the man asked in surprise.
"She had to, she is melted," the Scarecrow explained.
"Good news!
Who melted her?"
the man asked.
"Dorothy," the Lion said.
The man bowed low to her.
He locked their spectacles on their eyes again.
They went through the gate into the Emerald City.
The beautiful green girl took them to their old rooms.
They thought the Great Wizard would send for them right away, but they waited for days.
The Scarecrow told the green girl to send a message to Oz that if he didn't see them at once, they would call the Winged Monkeys to help them.
When Oz heard this, he was so afraid.
He told them to come to the Throne Room at four minutes after nine o'clock the next morning.
The next morning, they went into the Throne Room of the Great Oz.
They each expected to see the Wizard in the shape they saw before.
But when they looked around, there was no one.
Then they heard a solemn voice coming from the high dome of the ceiling.
"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible.
Why do you seek me?"
Dorothy asked, "Where are you?"
The Voice said, "I am everywhere, but to you I am invisible.
I will sit on my throne."
Suddenly the voice came from the throne.
The four stood in a row in front of the throne.
"We are here to claim our promises," Dorothy said.
"What promises?" asked Oz.
They each reminded him of the promises he made when they destroyed the Wicked Witch.
"Is she really destroyed?" the Voice asked with a little tremble.
"Yes," Dorothy said.
"I melted her with water."
The Voice said, "Come back tomorrow."
"We won't wait a day longer," the Scarecrow said.
The Lion gave a great roar that scared Toto.
The dog jumped back and tipped over a screen in the corner.
Everyone looked as it crashed to the floor.
Standing where the screen had been was a little old man with a bald head and wrinkled face.
He was as surprised as they were.
The Tin Woodman raised his ax.
He ran toward the man.
"Who are you?"
"I am Oz, the Great and Terrible," the little man said, his voice shaking. "
Don't hit me.
I'll do anything you want."
They each shouted that they thought Oz was a Head, a Lady, a Beast, or a Ball of Fire.
"No, I have been pretending," the man said.
Dorothy shouted, "Aren't you a Great Wizard?"
The Wizard said that he was only a man.
"You're a humbug!"
the Scarecrow said sadly.
"Yes," the little man said, "I am a humbug."
"How will I get my heart?" the Tin Woodman asked.
"Or my courage?" asked the Lion.
"Or my brains," cried the Scarecrow, wiping tears from his eyes.
"Doesn't anyone else know you are a fake?"
Dorothy asked.
"No one knows it but you four and myself," Oz said.
"I have fooled everyone for a long time.
I should never have let you into the Throne Room."
He told them how he hung a painted face for the Head and wore a dress and mask to be the Lady.
The Beast was only a lot of skins sewn together over wood.
The Ball of Fire was a ball of cotton that had oil poured on it to burn.
"I am a ventriloquist," he said about the voice each heard.
He asked them to sit while he told his story.
"I was born in Omaha," he began.
"I became a great ventriloquist.
But then I got tired of it and became a balloonist.
I would go up in a balloon on circus day to bring the crowds to the circus.
"One day," he said, "I went up and the ropes got twisted.
The balloon went high above the clouds.
The wind carried it many miles away.
On the second morning, I woke up and found I was floating over a strange and beautiful country.
"When the balloon came down, I was surrounded by strange people.
They thought I was a Great Wizard.
I let them think that because they were afraid of me and promised to do anything I wanted.
I ordered them to build the City and Palace.
The country was so green
I called it the Emerald City.
To make it truly that, I put green glasses on everyone so everything they saw was green."
"But isn't it green?" asked Dorothy.
"No," Oz said.
"Only when you wear the glasses.
The Emerald City was built many years ago.
I was a young man when the balloon brought me here.
I have been good to the people and they like me.
But I have shut myself in this Palace since it was built."
He explained that his greatest fear was the Witches.
He had no real powers but they did.
If the Witches of the East and West, who were very wicked, had not thought he was more powerful, they would have destroyed him.
"I would promise anything to you if you would get rid of the Witch of the West.
I am ashamed that I cannot keep my promises."
"You are a very bad man," said Dorothy.
But Oz said, "No, I'm a good man, but a very bad wizard."
The Scarecrow said, "I will be very unhappy unless you give me brains."
The false Wizard looked at him.
"I'm not a magician, but if you will come to me tomorrow, I will stuff your head with brains.
You must learn how to use them."
"Thank you!"
cried the Scarecrow.
"What about my courage?" the Lion asked. "
I will be unhappy unless I have the kind of courage that makes me forget I am afraid."
"I will give you that kind of courage tomorrow," said Oz.
The Tin Woodman said, "What about my heart?"
Oz said quietly, "Come to me tomorrow and you shall have a heart."
"How will I get back to Kansas?"
Dorothy asked.
"I will have to think about that," the little man said.
"Give me a few days to find a way to carry you over the desert.
You can stay here as guests.
But one thing I ask in return, keep my secret and tell no one I am a humbug."
They promised to say nothing and went happily to their rooms.
Even Dorothy felt hope that "The Great and Terrible Humbug," as she called him, would find a way to send her back to Kansas.
If he did, she would forgive him for everything.
The next morning the Scarecrow told his friends he was going to Oz to get his brains.
"I will come back like other men."
"I like you the way you are," Dorothy said.
When he got to the Throne Room, Oz said, "Come in."
"I've come for my brains," the Scarecrow said.
Oz told him to sit down. "
Excuse me for taking your head off, but I have to do it to put your brains in the right place."
The Wizard took off the Scarecrow's head and emptied out the straw.
He went into a back room and measured out some bran that he mixed with pins and needles.
He shook them together and filled the top of the Scarecrow's head.
Then he stuffed a little straw in to hold it all in place.
He put the Scarecrow's head back on his body. "
Now you will be a great man, because I have given you a lot of bran-new brains."
The Scarecrow was proud that he got his greatest wish.
He thanked Oz and went back to his friends.
"How do you feel?"
Dorothy asked.
"I feel very wise," he answered.
"I must get my heart," the Tin Woodman said.
At the Throne Room, Oz said, "Come in."
The Woodman said, "I've come for my heart."
"I will have to cut a hole in your chest so I can put your heart in the right place," Oz said.
He brought a pair of special scissors and cut a small hole in the left side of the Woodman's chest.
He took a pretty heart of silk stuffed with sawdust.
"Is it a kind heart?" the Woodman asked.
"Very!" answered Oz.
When he had put the heart in the hole and repaired the hole, he said, "Now you have a heart any man would be proud of."
The Woodman thanked him and went back to his friends.
The Lion went to the Throne Room.
"Come in," Oz said.
"I have come for my courage," the Lion said.
The little man went to a cupboard and took down a square green bottle.
He poured what was inside into a green-gold dish.
He told the Lion, "Drink.
Once it is inside you, it will be courage."
The Lion quickly drank it all.
"How do you feel?"
Oz asked.
"Full of courage," the Lion said.
He went back to his friends.
Oz was happy with how he made the three.
"It was easy because they imagined I could do anything.
But it will take more than imagination to take Dorothy back to Kansas.
I don't know how I can do it."
Three days passed and Dorothy heard nothing from Oz.
They were sad days for her.
The Scarecrow told them all that there were wonderful thoughts in his head.
The Tin Woodman told Dorothy that his new heart was kinder and more tender than the one he had before.
The Lion said that he wasn't afraid of anything and would face an army of men or a dozen Kalidahs.
Everyone was happy except Dorothy.
On the fourth day, Oz sent for her.
When she went into the Throne Room he said, "I think I have found a way to get you out of this country."
"Back to Kansas?" she asked.
"I'm not sure about Kansas," Oz said.
"I don't know where it is.
But the first thing to do is cross the desert
and then it should be easy."
"How?" Dorothy asked.
The little man explained that he came to the country in a balloon and that she also came through the air.
He could not make a cyclone, but he believed he could make a balloon.
The problem was that there was no gas to make the balloon float.
"But we could fill it with hot air.
If the air got cold and came down in the desert, we would be lost."
"We?
Are you going with me?"
Dorothy asked.
"Yes. I am tired of being a humbug.
I have to stay shut up in these rooms all day.
I'd rather go to Kansas with you and be in a circus again," Oz said.
Together they took needle and thread and sewed strips of silk into the right shape.
There was a strip of light green silk, then dark green, then emerald green.
It took three days to sew all the strips together.
Oz painted the inside with glue to make it airtight.
"The balloon is ready, but we must have a basket to ride in," Oz said.
He found a big clothes basket and fastened it with many ropes to the bottom of the balloon.
When it was ready, Oz sent word to his people that he was going to visit a wizard who lived in the clouds.
Everyone came to see the wonderful sight.
The Tin Woodman chopped a pile of wood and made a fire with it.
Oz held the bottom of the balloon over the fire so hot air would be caught in it.
The balloon grew and rose into the air.
Oz got into the basket and said, "I am going away to make a visit.
The Scarecrow will rule while I am gone.
You will obey him as you would me."
The balloon tugged hard at the rope that held it to the ground.
"Hurry, Dorothy!"
the Wizard shouted.
"I can't find Toto," she said.
He had run into the crowd to bark at a kitten.
Dorothy found him, and they ran to the balloon.
When she was a few steps away, Oz held out his hands to help her.
Crack!
The ropes snapped and the balloon rose into the air without Dorothy.
"Come back!
" she screamed.
"I can't," called Oz. "
Good-bye!"
"Good-bye!"
everyone shouted.
That was the last any of them saw Oz, the Wonderful Wizard.
The people remembered him and loved him.
"He built us this wonderful city.
Now he has gone and left the Wise Scarecrow to rule," they said.
Dorothy cried at the loss of her hope to get home to Kansas.
The Scarecrow was now the ruler of the Emerald City.
The next morning, the travelers met in the Throne Room.
The Scarecrow sat in the big throne.
"We are lucky," said the new ruler.
"
The Palace and the Emerald City belong to us.
I am happy with where I am now.
If only Dorothy would be happy to live here, we could all be happy together," the Scarecrow said.
"I want to go to Kansas and live with Aunt Em and Uncle Henry," cried Dorothy.
The Scarecrow thought hard and said, "Why not call the Winged Monkeys and ask them to carry you over the desert."
Dorothy was excited at the idea and went to get the Golden Cap.
She brought it back and spoke the magic words.
The Winged Monkeys flew through the open window.
"This is the second time you've called," the Monkey King said.
"What do you wish?"
"I want you to fly me to Kansas," Dorothy said.
But the Monkey King said, "That can't be done.
We belong to this country and cannot leave it and cross the desert.
Good-bye."
The monkeys flew out the window.
Dorothy wanted to cry.
The Scarecrow was thinking again.
"We can call the soldier with the green whiskers and ask his advice."
They called the soldier into the Throne Room, where he had never been before.
"This little girl wants to cross the desert," the Scarecrow said.
"No one has crossed it except Oz himself," said the soldier.
"Maybe Glinda can help."
"Who?" the Scarecrow asked.
"The Witch of the South, the most powerful of all the Witches.
Her castle stands on the edge of the desert," the soldier said.
"I have heard she is a beautiful woman and knows how to keep young."
He told them that the road to the castle is straight to the South. "
It is full of dangers to travelers.
There are wild beasts and a race of strange men who do not like strangers."
The Scarecrow said, "The best thing for Dorothy is to travel to the Land of the South to see Glinda."
"I will go with Dorothy," the Lion said.
"I am tired of the city and want to be in the woods again.
Dorothy will need someone to protect her."
The Woodman agreed.
"My ax may be of help, so I will also go with Dorothy."
"When will we start?" the Scarecrow asked.
They were surprised.
"Are you going?"
The Scarecrow said, "If it wasn't for Dorothy, I would not have brains.
She took me down from the pole and brought me to the Emerald City.
I will never leave her until she starts back to Kansas."
"Thank you," Dorothy said.
"I want to go as soon as we can."
"We will leave in the morning," said the Scarecrow.
"Let us get ready.
It will be a long journey."
The next morning, the Guardian at the Gate unlocked their glasses.
"You are ruler now," he said to the Scarecrow. "
Come back to us soon."
They walked out of the Emerald City and began their journey.
They traveled for many days through forests, bogs, and fields.
At last, they arrived in the land of the Good Witch.
The country of the Quadlings was beautiful and full of fields, brooks, fences, houses, and bridges.
All were painted red.
The Quadlings were short and heavy and looked friendly.
They were dressed in red.
The travelers walked up to a nearby farmhouse and knocked at the door.
The farmer's wife opened it and gave them all a good dinner.
"How far to the castle of Glinda?
"
Dorothy asked.
"Not far," the woman answered.
"Go down the road to the South."
They thanked her and walked across the pretty bridges until they saw a beautiful castle.
In front of the gates were three young girls.
They were dressed in red uniforms.
They asked, "Why have you come to the South Country?"
"To see the Good Witch," Dorothy said.
"Let me have your name," one of the girls said.
"I will ask Glinda if she will see you."
Soon she came back to say that Dorothy and the others were to come in at once.
They were first taken to a room at the castle to get ready to see Glinda.
Dorothy washed her face and combed her hair.
The Lion shook the dust out of his mane.
The Scarecrow patted himself into his best shape.
The Woodman polished his tin and oiled his joints.
They followed the soldier girl into a big room.
Glinda sat on a throne of rubies.
She was young and beautiful.
Her hair was red and dress pure white.
Her eyes were blue and looked kindly on Dorothy.
"What can I do for you?"
Glinda asked.
Dorothy told her their story.
"My great wish now is to get back to Kansas.
Aunt Em will think something horrible has happened to me and she will be sad.
Uncle Henry needs our help with the crops."
Glinda said, "Bless your heart, I am sure I can tell you how to get home.
If I do, you must give me the Golden Cap."
"Gladly," Dorothy said.
"I cannot use it now.
You can only command the Winged Monkeys three times."
"I will need them just those times," Glinda said.
Dorothy gave her the Golden Cap.
The Witch said to the Scarecrow, "What will you do when Dorothy has left?"
The Scarecrow said, "I will return to the Emerald City.
Oz has made me ruler and the people like me.
But I don't know how to cross the hill of the Hammer-Heads."
"I will command the Winged Monkeys to carry you to the Emerald City," Glinda said.
"It would be sad if they did not have such a wonderful ruler."
To the Tin Woodman she said, "What will happen to you when Dorothy leaves?"
"The Winkies were kind to me.
They wanted me to rule them.
If I could get back to the Country of the West, I would be happy to rule them forever."
"My second command to the Monkeys will be to carry you to the land of the Winkies.
You will rule them wisely and well," Glinda said.
Then the Witch looked at the Lion. "
When Dorothy returns home, what will become of you?"
"Over the hill of the Hammer-Heads is a wonderful old forest.
The beasts there made me their king.
If I could get there, I would live my life there happily," the Lion said.
Glinda said, "My third command to the Winged Monkeys will be to carry you to your forest.
Then I will give the Golden Cap to the King of the Monkeys so they can be free forever."
Dorothy said, "You are as good as you are beautiful.
But how will you get me back to Kansas?"
"Your silver shoes will carry you over the desert.
If you had known their power, you could have gone home the first day you came here."
"But I would not have had my wonderful brains!
I would have spent my life in the cornfield," the Scarecrow said.
"And I would not have my lovely heart," the Tin Woodman said.
"I would have been rusted in the forest till the end of the world."
"And I would have been a coward forever," the Lion said.
"No beast in the forest would have a good word to say to me."
Dorothy said she was happy that she had helped her friends. "
But you all have what you want most.
I would like to go back to Kansas."
Glinda said, "The silver shoes can carry you to any place in three steps, like the wink of an eye.
Knock the heels together three times and tell the shoes to carry you where you want to go."
Dorothy hugged the Lion's neck and patted his head gently.
She kissed the Tin Woodman, who cried in a way that was dangerous to his joints.
Then she hugged the stuffed Scarecrow in her arms.
She cried over leaving her new friends.
Glinda the Good stepped from her throne to give Dorothy a good-bye kiss.
Dorothy took Toto in her arms and said one last good-bye.
She clapped the heels of her shoes together three times.
"Take me home to Aunt Em!" she said.
Instantly she whirled through the air.
All she could see and feel was the wind whistling past her ears.
The silver shoes took only three steps.
Then she stopped so suddenly that she rolled on the grass several times.
She sat up and said, "Good gracious!"
She was sitting on the Kansas prairie.
In front of her was the new farmhouse Uncle Henry built after the cyclone carried the old one away.
He was milking the cows in the barnyard.
Toto jumped out of her arms and ran to the barn, barking happily.
Dorothy stood and found that the silver shoes had fallen off in her flight and were lost forever in the desert.
Aunt Em just came out of the house to water the cabbages.
She looked up and saw Dorothy running toward her.
"My darling child!
" she cried.
She hugged Dorothy and covered her face with kisses.
"Where in the world did you come from?"
Dorothy said, "From the Land of Oz.
And here is Toto.
And oh, Aunt Em, I am so glad to be home again!"