The highway running east from Sichuan to Hunan comes, just west of the border, to Chatong, a small town in the hills.
Nearby a stream flows past a small pagoda, at the foot of which lives a solitary household: an old man, a girl and a dog.
The stream winds down three li or so through the rocks to join the big river at Chatong, and once you cross the water it is only one li over the hills to the town.
Since the channel curves like a bow, the path through the hills, like a bow-string, is slightly shorter.
The stream bed, some twenty feet wide, is made up of boulders.
In places the quiet waters are too deep for a pole to reach the bottom, yet so clear that you can count the fish swimming there.
The water level fluctuates considerably, and while there is no money to build a bridge a ferry has been provided, a barge which holds about twenty men and horses - more than that and it has to make a second trip.
A movable iron hoop is attached to a bamboo post in the bow while a hawser spans the stream.
To cross, all you need do is slip the hoop over the hawser and pull yourself slowly to the other side.
As the boat nears the bank, the ferryman with a shout of "Steady, now!"
leaps ashore holding the hoop; then passengers and horses disembark to disappear over the hills.
Since this ferry is public property, no toll is paid.
If some well-meaning passenger tosses down a few coins, the ferryman picks them up one by one and thrusts them back into his hand, protesting almost truculently, "I'm paid for this job - three pecks of rice and seven hundred coins!
I don't want your money!"
Some insist on paying, however, unable to look on with an easy conscience while hard work goes unrewarded.
This upsets the ferryman, who, to ease his own conscience, gets someone to buy tea or tobacco leaves in town and keeps bundles of Chatong's best tobacco hanging from his girdle to offer cheerfully to all and sundry.
When he senses a traveller's interest in this tobacco, he sticks a few leaves in his baggage-roll, saying, "Care for a smoke, brother?
This is first-rate.
Doesn't look much, with leaves as broad as the palm of your hand, but it has a mighty fine flavour.
Makes a good present too!"
The tea he brews in summer in a large pitcher for any thirsty passer-by.
This ferryman is the old fellow who lives just below the pagoda.
Seventy now, he has stayed since the age of twenty beside this stream, ferrying countless passengers in fifty years.
It is high time the sturdy old man retired, but evidently fate will otherwise: no throwing in his hand for him.
Without reflecting what this job means, he carries on quietly and faithfully.
Fate, in his case, is the girl at his side who makes him feel the lure of life at sunrise and stops him from brooding about death at sunset.
His sole companions are the ferry-boat and Brownie, the dog; his sole relation this girl.
The girl's mother, his only daughter, fifteen years ago had a love affair behind her father's back with a soldier at Chatong who serenaded her.
He put her in the family way, but could only marry her if they eloped.
For him that would have meant deserting his post, for her leaving her father all alone.
Her lover knew that she dreaded the thought of eloping and shrank from spoiling his own record as a soldier; there seemed no way for them to live together, but nothing to prevent their dying together... and indeed a severe bout of illness carried him off.
His sweetheart hesitated to follow him because of her unborn child.
When this came to the knowledge of the ferryman, he uttered not a word of reproach but carried on quietly as if he knew nothing of the matter.
Shame and pity kept the girl at her father's side.
But as soon as her child was born she killed herself by drinking too much cold stream water.
Miraculously the orphan survived: she is now a girl of thirteen.
Because their home was among bamboos and hills of a glorious emerald green, the old boatman gave the poor mite the name Emerald.
Wind and sun have tanned the growing girl's skin, her eyes resting on green hills are as clear as crystal.
Nature is her mother and teacher, making her innocent, lively and untamed as some small wild creature.
She has the gentleness of a fawn and seems not to know the meaning of cruelty, anxiety or anger.
Should a stranger on the ferry stare at her, she fixes her brilliant eyes on him as if ready to fly any instant to the mountains; but once she knows no harm is meant, she finishes her task calmly.
Rain or fine, the old man stays at his post.
When passengers come he grasps the hawser and, straining forward, hauls the ferry across.
Tired out, he lies down to sleep on a rock near by; and if someone hails them from the further shore Emerald will not let her grandfather get up but jumps aboard to take his place as nimbly as you could wish.
Sometimes she and Brownie accompany him and she hauls on the hawser with him.
As the ferry nears the bank and her grandfather calls, "Steady, now!"
the dog bounds ashore with the rope in his mouth to tug the ferry in, proud of the part he is playing.
The old man and his granddaughter are familiar figures to the villagers round Chatong, and Brownie is a favourite with them too.
On a fine day when no one comes by to disturb them, the old man and Emerald may sit sunning themselves on a boulder in front of the door, or throw a stick from the cliff into the water to watch Brownie plunge in to retrieve it.
Sometimes Emerald and the dog listen intently to her grandfather's tales of fighting in the town in years long past, or he and his granddaughter play a wedding tune on their bamboo flutes.
The arrival of a traveller makes the old man lay aside his flute and hurry down to ferry the stranger across.
Then from the cliff the girl calls:
"I'll play, grandad, and you sing!"
The old man in midstream breaks into cheerful song, his hoarse voice mingling with the strains of the flute to float out into the stillness and bring new life to the stream.
Indeed, the echoing music accentuates the stillness.
From east Sichuan sometimes come calves, flocks of sheep or a decorated bridal sedan-chair.
Then Emerald insists on taking charge and, standing in the stern, pulls lazily on the hawser while the barge inches slowly across.
She follows the calves, sheep or bridal-chair ashore, sees them up the hill and watches them vanish in the distance before turning back to take the boat home again.
She imitates the bleating of the lambs, the lowing of the cows, or sticks a flower in her hair to play the part of a bride.
A bare li separates Chatong from the ferry.
When the old man goes in to buy oil of salt or for New Year or some other festival, he likes to have a drink in town.
If he stays at home, Brownie goes in with Emerald to buy what is needed.
All she sees in the grocery impresses the girl: the stacks of vermicelli, the huge vats of sugar, the fire-crackers and red candles - she will talk about these for hours when she gets home.
Moreover the riverside there is thronged with junks working their way upstream, with dozens of boatmen busy loading and unloading.
And these vessels, so much larger and more exciting than their barge, have a vivid place in her recollections too.
Chatong stands wedged between the river and mountains, its wall in the rear coiling like a snake on the hillside.
By the wharves outside the front section of the wall a host of small craft lie at anchor.
These go downstream laden with tung oil, rock salt or the galls used in dyeing; and upstream with raw cotton, cotton yarn, textiles, miscellaneous goods or sea products.
On the frontage between the wharves space is so limited that most houses are built on stilts overhanging the water.
In spring the river rises imperceptibly till families living on the front throw long ladders from their roofs to the city wall and, swearing and shouting, lugging bundles, bedding and big rice containers, cross by these ladders into town.
When the water recedes, they come out through the city gate.
At times the river rises so suddenly that some houses on the front are swept away before the blank eyes of the watchers on the city wall, including the flood victims themselves, who take this loss as phlegmatically as any other natural calamity they are powerless to avert.
Watchers on the wall can see houses, oxen, sheep and big trees washed down from the mountains on the swirling, foaming water which has overflown its banks.
So men often wait in sampans where the current flows less strongly, in front of the Customs Boat, for instance; and as soon as an animal, tree, empty boat or one with a woman or child crying in it come into sight, they row off furiously to intercept it, and having lassoed it pull it back to the shore.
These stout fellows are typical of the locality, being both profit-seeking and good-hearted.
Whether out to save lives or salvage goods, they risk their necks cheerfully with a courage and resourcefulness beyond all praise.
This river, famed in history as the You, is now known as the White River.
After reaching Chenzhou where it mingles with the River Yuan, its waters grow turgid.
But if you sail upstream, you can see clear to the bottom of pools thirty to fifty feet deep, so transparent is the water.
In sunlight, even the white pebbles on the river bed and the veins on the cornelian pebbles stand out distinctly.
The fish darting to and fro seem floating in air.
The mountains on either side, covered with the tapering bamboos from which paper is made, are a deep, vivid emerald the whole year round.
Most homesteads near the water are set among peach and apricot trees, so that in spring wherever there is blossom you can count on finding people, and wherever people are you can count on a drink.
In summer the girls' purple tunics hung up to dry in the sun serve as flags to mark the whereabouts of men, while all through the middle reaches of the river in autumn and winter your eyes are caught by the cottages perched on crags overhanging the water.
With their brown mud walls, black tiles and perfect setting, they harmonize so completely with the surroundings that your heart leaps up in delight.
Any traveller with the least feeling for poetry or painting could drift here without tiring for full thirty days in a small boat, for there are fresh marvels at every turn produced by man's labour and the bold skill of Nature which hold you utterly spellbound.
The White River rises on the Sichuan border, and in spring when the water is high small vessels can push up as far as Mount Xiu in Sichuan.
But Chatong is the last port on the Hunan border.
Though the river is half a li wide here, in autumn and winter when the water falls it dwindles to a mere two hundred feet across, flowing through an expanse of black rocks.
Since boats can go no further, all goods coming into Sichuan or leaving it are unloaded or loaded here.
Coolies with carrying-poles of mulberry wood bring goods here for shipment east, while freight brought in is made up into loads here for porters to take on.
The town is garrisoned by a battalion reorganized from the old Green Battalion.
There are about five hundred military households, some of which own fields in the hills or tung oil presses; some are small capitalists who have invested in oil, rice or cotton yarn; but most are soldiers' families drafted here.
There is a revenue bureau too in the small temple at the end of the waterfront outside the city wall, which generally has a long notice posted up.
The director of the bureau lives in the town.
The old military yamen serves as barracks, but the soldiers' presence would probably pass unnoticed if not for the sentries who practise bugling every day on the wall.
If you go into town during the day in winter, you see clothes and vegetables drying before every door, sweet potatoes hanging with trailing vines from the eaves, as well as sacks full of chestnuts, hazelnuts or the like.
Poultry cluck cheerfully.
Men saw wood in front of their doors or chop firewood to stack in the yard, while middle-aged women in starched blue cotton clothes and flowered aprons chat to each other in the sunlight as they bend over their work.
Peace reigns supreme and the townsfolk spend all their days in an unspoiled solitude hard to imagine.
Tranquillity makes them reflect more deeply on life, makes them dream more.
Naturally every soul in this little town in his allotted span of days has his private hopes and is torn by love and hate.
Exactly what fills their minds it is hard to say.
Those living high up in the town can watch the river from their doorsteps, the boats plying to and fro and the endless lines of towmen on the further bank.
Some towmen from downstream bring superior cakes and foreign confectionery to sell in town when their junk moors: that is what a boat's arrival means to most children.
As for the older folk, they raise a brood of chicks or a couple of pigs for the boatman in exchange for gold ear-rings, a few yards of strong blue material, a vat of good soyabean sauce or a handsome paraffin lamp &#8212; these are the chief concern of the housewives.
For all its quiet tranquillity, this little town is a centre of trade and communications for east Sichuan, and therefore the small waterfronts have a character all their own.
There are inns where merchants put up, barbers' establishments, not to mention restaurants, general stores, oil and salt depots and drapers' shops.
There are ship-chandlers too, and "wharf-rats" who make a living by recruiting boatmen.
The long tables in front of the modest eating houses often bear crisp brown carp fried with beancurd and garnished with slivers of red paprika in shallow dishes next to bamboo holders filled with scarlet chopsticks.
For a few cents anyone can sit down at the table and pull out a pair of chopsticks.
Then a woman with plucked eyebrows and a powdered face will come to ask, "Would you care for sweet wine or rice wine, master?"
A spirited man who likes to tease will retort, "Sweet wine?
What do you take me for &#8212; a child?"
Then rich yellow wine is ladled out of the vat into an earthen bowl and brought promptly to the table.
This potent, fragrant brew can knock a strong man out if he drinks too much.
The general stores sell paraffin, paraffin lamps, candles and paper.
The oil depots purchase tung oil.
The salt merchants store the dark rock salt from Sichuan's salt wells.
The drapers stock white cotton yarn, cloth, cotton and black silk headscarves.
The ship-chandlers have everything a junk can need down to anchors weighing a good hundred catties displayed outside to tempt the customers in.
The doors of the "wharf-rats" on the waterfront remain open all day long as in and out troop jolly boatmen or boat-owners in dark satin jackets over long gowns.
These places are like tea-houses where no tea is sold.
They are not opium dens, yet you can smoke opium there.
Although men come here on business, from the boat-owners down to the oarsmen and towmen they make it a rule never to mention figures.
Most of them drop in here to have a good time.
They discuss local happenings, the state of trade in both provinces, and news from down-river.
Meetings and financial transactions take place here too, not to mention dicing and gambling.
But the two main items of business are deals in boats and in wives.
As trade in a town develops, so do parasites.
And to cater for the merchants and boatmen, the shanties on the waterfront of the small town begin to house women of a special type who come in from the surrounding countryside or whose husbands, Sichuanese soldiers, have been drafted to Hunan and never returned.
These women wear artificial silk tunics, flowered print trousers, and have long, arched eyebrows, big, lavishly scented chignons.
They pass the day seated on stools at their doors embroidering red and green phoenixes on their slippers or waistbands for their lovers, one eye on the passers-by.
Or they stare down from their windows at the junks being loaded and unloaded, or listen to the boatmen's chants as they swarm up the masts.
At dusk they set to work in earnest, entertaining merchants and boatmen one after another.
Border ways are so simple that even these girls remain honest.
Before entertaining a stranger, they ask for their money and count it before closing the door and getting down to business.
But in the case of an old customer, the matter of payment is left up to him.
Whereas most of the women's income comes from merchants, it is usually the boatmen who win their hearts.
Two lovers at parting bite their lips and swear to go steady during their separation.
For six or seven weeks maybe, the man on his boat and the girl on the waterfront wait for the long days to go by, the hearts of each with the loved one far away.
The girls, especially, love so well that if one's sweetheart fails to return by the time appointed, she dreams of his boat putting in to shore and sees him bound down the gangway to run to her side.
If she has begun to doubt him, she dreams of him singing to another woman, forgetting her.
Then weaker spirits jump into the river or swallow opium in their dreams, while the bolder seize a chopper to take revenge.
Although outside the pale of normal society, their love affairs too are attended by tears and laughter, and love and hate loom so large in their lives that passion can easily blind them to all around.
Where they differ from other young people is simply in intensity of feeling &#8212; call it greater folly, if you like.
Short-term engagements, long-term "marriages", or a temporary retirement &#8212; none of the simple folk there think any the worse of prostitutes for such behaviour, not using the standards of educated men to condemn them.
Prostitutes they may be, yet setting such store by right, so little by profit, they are often more to be trusted than those gentlemen in the city who talk of nothing but morality and conscience.
The wharf-master, Shun Shun, served under the Qing Dynasty banner before becoming an officer in the celebrated 49th Detachment of the revolutionary army in 1911.
Whereas other officers made a name during the revolution or lost their heads, he went home with a game leg and invested his modest savings in a six-oared boat which he hired out to a poor boat-owner to ship goods between Chatong and Chenzhou.
His luck held for two years, and with the money he made he married a fairly well-to?do, good-looking widow.
A few years later he had four boats, large and small, a wife and two sons.
Fortune smiled on this open-handed, easy-going man; but being a sociable fellow, quick to help those in distress, he never made a pile like some oil merchants.
Having roughed it himself in the army, he knew the hardships of life on the road and could sympathize with the misfortunes of others; thus he gave unstinted help to boat-owners bankrupt through wrecks, demobilized soldiers on their way home, or needy scholars.
This was how he disposed of the money he made on the river.
In spite of his game leg he could still swim; and although he walked with a limp, he was straight as a die in his dealings.
The regulation of the river traffic is a simple business, based on established custom.
If two boats collide or one gets in another's way, there are time-honoured methods of settling the matter.
But the arbitration has to be done by an elderly man whose integrity is beyond question.
One autumn the old wharf-master died, and Shun Shun took his place.
He was only fifty but so shrewd, honest and easy to get on with, so little interested in money, that no objections were raised on the score of his age.
Shun Shun's elder son is sixteen now, the younger fourteen.
Strong as a pair of young oxen, good boatmen, swimmers and walkers, they excel in all the activities that village youngsters go in for.
The elder takes after his father, being manly and open, impatient of meaningless conventions.
The younger is quieter, more like his good-looking mother.
One glance at his fine features and you can see that here is an intelligent, sensitive lad.
To toughen his sons, now that they are no longer boys, Shun Shun sends them out in turn on trips.
They travel downstream on his boats sharing the discomforts and pleasures of the crew.
Rowing, they pull the heaviest oar; towing, they head the team.
Their food is salted fish, paprika and pickled vegetables; their bed the hard deck.
At other times they trudge in straw sandals to east Sichuan with goods to sell at Mount Xiu, Longtan and Youyang.
Whatever the weather, cold, sweltering, wet or snowy, they have to make each stage on time.
They carry knives so that, if set upon, they can draw to defend themselves, settling the dispute with blood if necessary.
Knives are indispensable in these parts for dealing with enemies or for swearing friendship.
And these youngsters lose no chance of using them.
They have learned trading, the laws of hospitality, how to fit into a new place, and how to defend themselves and their good name.
This upbringing is designed to teach them courage and give them a sense of values.
As a result, Shun Shun's two lads are strong as tigers but pleasant-spoken and modest, with nothing in them of the loafer, braggart or bully.
Indeed, they and their father are highly thought of in all the region round Chatong.
When the boys were young, Shun Shun realized that his first-born took after him and would have no trouble making his way in the world, while the younger boy was cast in a finer mould.
He had a soft spot in his heart for the younger, giving him the name Nuosong, his brother that of Tianbao.
And Nuosong was such a fine-looking boy that the Chatong boatmen nicknamed him Yue Yun.
For everyone's first impression of Nuosong was that here was a Yue Yun in white helmet and armour just off the stage.
The military commander in this area has succeeded so well in preserving the peace that for ten years and more there has been no serious disturbance at the border.
Trade by land and water has not been disrupted by fighting or banditry.
Order reigns and men live well content with their lot.
The loss of a buffalo, the capsizing of a boat or a death in the family will plunge them into sorrow; for the rest, however, they seem quite untouched by the unhappy struggles going on elsewhere in the country.
The liveliest days in this border town are the Dragon Boat Festival, the Mid-autumn Festival and the Spring Festival.
The whole of Chatong makes as merry on these occasions as fifty years ago, and the local people have the time of their lives.
On the Dragon Boat Festival in the fifth month, women and children put on new clothes and paint the character for "king" on their foreheads with a mixture of realgar and yellow wine.
Fish and meat are eaten by every family.
The whole town sits down to lunch round about eleven, then doors are locked and they go out to watch the boatrace.
Those with friends on the waterfront may go there; the rest flock to the wharves or the door of the Customs House.
The race starts downstream just off Changtan and finishes at the Customs House.
So today all the notables of the town, including army officers and customs officials, gather there to watch the fun.
Preparations have been made well in advance, different groups choosing their strongest, ablest young men to practise rowing.
The dragon boats are longer and narrower than ordinary sampans, with curved ends and sides painted with vermilion stripes.
They are stored in dry caves by the river for the rest of the year.
Each boat seats twelve to eighteen oarsmen, a cox and two men to beat drums and gongs.
Each rower has a short oar and the beat of the drum regulates their speed while the red-turbaned cox in the stern signals with two small flags the course to take.
Generally the drum and gong are in the middle, and when the race reaches a critical stage they raise a din like thunder which, added to the roar of cheers and boos on the bank, reminds you of some epic river battle of old.
The winning crew receives prizes at the Customs House: red silk and a small silver badge to be sported by one of the oarsmen as a sign of their stamina and coordination.
To greet the victorious boat, the bluff army officers let off five hundred fire-crackers at the river's edge.
After the race, the notables enjoy themselves with the humble folk and add to the excitement of the day by getting soldiers to throw into the river thirty green-headed drakes with red cloth tied round their long necks.
The best swimmers, soldiers or civilians, chase these birds, and whoever catches one keeps it.
This provides a new spectacle &#8212; a river dotted with drakes chased by good swimmers.
The boatrace and the race between drakes and men continue till dusk falls.
Wharf-master Shun Shun was a champion swimmer who never failed to catch a drake.
But Nuosong, the year that he was ten, bagged a bird by swimming under water to it, after which Shun Shun told his sons, half in jest, "I can leave this to you now.
No point in my competing with the two of you."
So he no longer takes part in these races, though when it comes to saving someone from drowning he thinks nothing of jumping into the water.
Even if he lives to be eighty, you may be sure Shun Shun will go through fire or flood to rescue someone in danger.
Tianbao and Nuosong are two of the best rowers and swimmers in these parts.
Now the Dragon Boat Festival is at hand again.
The race will take place on the fifth.
So on the first a meeting is held on the waterfront, and it is decided to lower the waterfront's boat that very morning.
As it happens, Tianbao has to set out today with some merchants to deliver festival goods to Longtan; so it is left to Nuosong to take part.
Sixteen youngsters, strong as young oxen, carrying candles, fire-crackers and a big oxhide drum painted with a red diagram of the yin and yang, march through the hills to where their boat is kept and, lighting the candles, carry it down to the water.
Once aboard, they let off their fire-crackers and with a great burst of drumming fly off like a featherless arrow downstream to Changtan.
That happens in the morning.
After noon the fisherfolk on the further shore launch their dragon boat too and both crews begin training for the race.
The first roll of drums on the water brings home to all who hear it the happy realization that the festival is at hand.
The thoughts of the women on the waterfront who are waiting and longing for their lovers fly to the men far away.
Many junks will hasten back for the festival, others will have to spend it far from home; and this makes it a time for rejoicing as well as for grieving.
Some eyes in the little town shine with joy while others are dimmed with disappointment.
When the roll of drums carries over water and hills to the ferry, the first to hear it is Brownie.
Barking wildly, he dashes round the house.
Next time passengers are ferried across, he follows them up the east bank and races up the hill overlooking town, yapping frantically.
Emerald, seated on the rock outside their hut, has been plaiting locusts and centipedes out of palm leaves while Brownie slept in the sun.
When he comes back from dashing round like a mad creature she scolds:
"Now then, Brownie!
Behave yourself!"
But presently she too catches the distant drumming and starts racing round the house, then crosses the river with her dog to stand listening on the next hill, letting the intoxicating sound carry her back in fancy to a previous year.
Two years before this, on the fifth of the fifth month, her grandfather found someone to mind the ferry while he took Brownie and Emerald into town to watch the dragon-boat race.
The bank was thick with people as four long vermilion boats came rowing upstream.
The river had just begun to rise and in the sunlight the water was pea-green.
As the drums rolled, Emerald bit her lips, happier than words could tell.
So many eager spectators were milling round that she did not notice when her grandfather disappeared, leaving her with Brownie.
Her eyes on the boats, she thought, "Grandad will soon be back."
But as time went by she began to be rather worried.
The day before he had asked:"If you went alone to see the boatrace tomorrow, would you be afraid of the crowds?
""No, I wouldn't," she said.
"But it's no fun all alone."
At that he bethought himself of an old friend in town and went in that same night to ask him to see to the ferry for one day, so that he could give Emerald a good time.
Since this friend lived all alone without even a dog, they invited him to a meal and to drink some yellow wine with a pinch of realgar.
The meal at an end and the job handed over, the others set off.
On the road, her grandfather said, "There's a fearful crowd there, lass.
It's a regular bedlam.
Dare you watch from the bank alone?
""Of course I dare," she said.
"But it's dull on your own."
Once by the river, the boats claimed all her attention.
The ferryman thought, "There's still a good three or four hours to go.
My friend oughtn't to miss this.
I'll go back and change with him."
He told Emerald, "There's such a mob here, don't move away.
I've something to do, but I'll be back for sure to take you home."
Intent on two boats now abreast, she agreed without thinking.
And knowing that Brownie would guard her, the old man left.
He found his friend at the foot of the white pagoda straining his ears to catch the sounds in the distance.
He called him to bring the boat over, and they crossed back to stand by the pagoda together.
The ferryman explained his return, concluding, "Don't trouble to come back if you're enjoying yourself.
Just tell Emerald to come home when everything's over.
If she's scared, you might bring her back."
His old crony had no wish to watch the race, however, preferring to sit and drink a few cups by the stream.
The old man gladly fetched out a gourdful of wine and shoved it towards him.
So they drank, talking over festivals long gone by, till his friend fell into a drunken sleep on the rock.
A drunken man could not go to town and the ferryman did not like to leave his post.
Meanwhile Emerald down by the river started to fret.
After the race, some army officers sent out sampans to drop ducks into the water; but still there was no sign of her grandfather.
On the chance that he was waiting somewhere else, she and Brownie searched through the crowd, but all in vain.
It would soon be dusk.
The soldiers who had brought out benches were carting them home again.
Only a few drakes were still at large on the river, while the number of their pursuers was dwindling too.
As the setting sun fell on the girl's home upstream, a fearful thought crossed her mind, "Can grandad be dead?"
He had told her to stay where she was, and to disprove her wild notion she assured herself that some friend must have kept him drinking.
Since this was highly likely, she decided against going home with Brownie before it was really dark.
Instead she stood there waiting on the wharf.
Presently the two dragon boats from the further bank rowed into a backwater and disappeared.
Most of the spectators had scattered.
Lights had been lit in the brothels, where girls were singing to the accompaniment of tambourines and guitars.
From other houses came shouts of men in their cups playing the finger-game.
On some boats moored nearby supper was being prepared: greens and turnips hissed and spluttered in boiling fat.
Daylight was fast fading on the river, where only one solitary white duck was floating, pursued by one solitary swimmer.
Still Emerald stayed where she was, sure that her grandfather would fetch her.
The singing in the houses grew louder, and a boatman on a junk close by remarked:"Jinting!
Isn't that your girl singing to some fat Sichuanese while he swills his wine?
Like to bet on it?"
Another boatman retorted, "When she sings for other fellows, she thinks of me.
She knows I'm here."
"Get on!
When she's in another man's arms, she thinks of you?
Prove it!"
"All right.
I will."
He whistled a few notes, and almost at once the singing upstairs stopped.
The two boatmen roared with laughter.
They went on to discuss that particular woman in language so coarse that it grated on Emerald's ears, but she could not go away.
When one remarked that the prostitute's father had been murdered seven years earlier on Cotton Hill, slashed with seventeen knives, Emerald's mind was troubled again with the strange notion: "Can grandad be dead?"
The two boatmen went on talking while the white duck floated slowly towards Emerald's wharf and she thought, "If you come any closer, I'll grab at you!"
She waited quietly till the duck was about thirty feet from the bank when the boatmen were hailed with a laugh by a swimmer in the water who had caught the duck.
They called back through the gloaming, "Good for you, Number Two!
How many did you catch today - five?"
"This one was a cunning old bird," replied the swimmer.
"But I bagged it in the end."
"You'll be just as good at bagging women one of these days!"
The swimmer made no reply but struck out to the wharf.
As he climbed ashore, dripping, Brownie set up a great barking to indicate the presence of his young mistress, and the swimmer caught sight of Emerald.
Apart from her the wharf was deserted.
"Who are you?"
he asked.
"Emerald. "
"Who's Emerald? "
"My grandad's ferryman at the Green Stream. "
"This is no ferry.
What are you doing here? "
"Waiting for grandad.
He's going to take me home. "
"He can't be coming.
Must have gone to the barracks to have a drink, got drunk and been carried home. "
"My grandad's not like that.
If he said he'd come, he will. "
"Well, don't wait here.
Come to my house - that one with the lamps - and wait for him there. "
Emerald's ears were still tingling from the boatmen's coarse talk so that she misunderstood this well-meant invitation and thought he wanted her to go to the building where a woman was singing.
She had never flown out at anyone before, but now, troubled by her grandfather's long delay and afraid she was being insulted, she swore under her breath:
"To hell with this hooligan! "
Low as the words were, he caught them, and realized that she was no more than a girl.
"Such language from a child! "
he teased, chuckling.
"If you stay here, mind a big fish doesn't bite you - don't expect me to rescue you! "
"Whether it bites me or not, that's none of your business! "
Brownie started barking again, as if aware that his mistress was offended.
The young man shook the white duck in his hand at the dog.
"Hey there!
What's wrong with you?"
Then he walked away.
Brownie would have chased angrily after, but Emerald cried, "Quiet, Brownie!
Never mind him! "
She meant that a fellow like this was beneath their notice, but the young man took her words in good part and laughed heartily as he was lost to sight.
Presently a man with a torch made of old cordage approached from the waterfront, waving his torch and calling Emerald's name.
But when he reached her the girl saw he was a stranger.
He told her the ferryman couldn't come for her but had sent a message asking her to go straight home.
Since he brought word from her grandfather, Emerald let him lead the way with his torch while Brownie circled round the pair of them as they skirted the city wall and made for the ferry.
Emerald asked how he had known where she was.
He said Number Two had told him.
He worked in Number Two's house and would have to go back as soon as he had seen her to the ferry.
"How did Number Two know where I was? "
"He saw you on the wharf when he came back from catching ducks.
Said he asked you to wait in our house, but only got cursed for his pains!
And your dog took him for a bad lot and kept on barking! "
"Who is Number Two? "
she asked in astonishment.
"Don't you know Number Two?"
It was his turn to be astonished.
"Nuosong, of course.
The Yue Yun of the waterfront.
He told me to see you home."
Nuosong's name was so well-known in Chatong that Emerald, abashed to have sworn at him, said no more but followed the torch-bearer in silence.
Soon they rounded the hill and saw the lights in the hut across the stream.
That same moment her grandfather saw the torch and promptly brought the boat over, calling gruffly, "Emerald!
Is that you, Emerald?"
His granddaughter made no answer but whispered to herself, "No, it's not Emerald.
Emerald's been eaten by the big fish in the river."
Once she was aboard, the man with the torch turned back.
Pulling on the hawser, her grandfather demanded, "Why don't you say anything, lass?
Angry with me?"
She just stood in the stern without a word.
But once home her indignation melted away when she saw the other old man in a drunken stupor.
Some secret reflections, though, kept her quiet and thoughtful the whole of that evening.
Two years have passed since then.
Both years saw moonless Mid-autumn Festivals, so that the young folk could not stay up all night, as the custom in this border region is, to watch the moon and sing; and accordingly both festivals made little impression on Emerald.
Each Spring Festival, though, lion dances and processions of dragon lanterns were arranged by the garrison and villagers from the countryside around; gongs and drums made a cheerful din at the ceremony to welcome spring, while on the evening of the fifteenth the troops, stripped to the waist, performed dragon and lion dances and were welcomed everywhere by fire-crackers and fireworks.
In the barracks, the residence of the chief of Customs and some of the larger shops on the waterfront, they prepared fireworks by cutting lengths of bamboo or hollowing out the stems of coir palms and filling eight hundred or a thousand of these tubes with nitre, sulphur and charcoal.
Bold soldiers bent on pleasure marched in a gay procession with lanterns and drums, while bundles of fire-crackers on long poles rained down upon their naked arms and shoulders, and the frenzied beating of gongs and drums added to the general excitement.
After a burst of firecrackers, they lit the fuses of the big fireworks tied to the legs of stools in the square.
Then sizzling white streaks of light shot up two hundred feet with a roar like thunder, to sprinkle the whole sky with sparks as they came down.
The spectators ducked nervously yet joyfully.
But the soldiers paraded their lanterns through the shower of sparks most splendidly unperturbed.
Emerald and her grandfather watched and shared in the excitement; yet the impression left on her was less vividly sweet than her recollection of that earlier Dragon Boat Festival.
Under the spell of this memory, she went to the river to watch the last dragon-boat race; but just when everything was most exciting, it started to rain and everybody was soaked.
To shelter from the rain the ferryman took her and Brownie to Shun Shun's house, where they found themselves a corner.
Someone walked past carrying a stool, and Emerald recognized the man who had escorted her back with a torch.
"Grandad!"
she whispered.
"That's the man who saw me home that year.
He led the way with a torch like an outlaw from the hills. "
Her grandfather said nothing, but next time the man passed he seized him and called with a laugh.
"Hey, there, outlaw!
You wouldn't come in and have a drink with me.
Afraid I'd poison a big man like you, eh? "
When the other recognized the ferryman, he grinned.
"You've grown, Emerald," he remarked.
"Number Two said the big fish in our river would eat you.
Now none of our fish here could swallow you. "
The girl said nothing but dimpled.
Number Two was nowhere to be seen, however.
From the men's conversation, Emerald learned that he was spending this festival six hundred li away at Green Wave Rapids in the middle reaches of the Yuan.
She met his elder brother, though, and the celebrated Shun Shun.
Number One brought home a duck he had caught in the river, and when the old ferryman remarked on its plumpness, Shun Shun told his son to give the bird to Emerald.
Moreover, knowing that she and her grandfather lived in too humble a way to make zong zi for the festival, he gave them a great bundle of pointed zong zi.
While the famed wharf-master and her grandfather were talking, Emerald kept her eyes on the river; but this did not stop her from catching every word.
Observing that she had grown into a lovely girl, Shun Shun asked her age and whether she were betrothed.
Her grandfather, in high good humour, spoke of Emerald in glowing terms but said nothing about her marriage, as if this could be no concern of anyone else.
Going home, he carried the duck and other things while she led the way with a torch.
They skirted the city wall, walking by the river.
"Shun Shun's one of the best," said her grandfather.
"Open-handed.
And Number One is a good youngster too.
It's a fine family! "
"Do you know the whole family? "
He missed the point of this question and because he was in such good spirits asked impulsively, "If Number One wanted you, lass, and sent over a go-between, would you have him? "
"Are you out of your mind, grandad?
Don't talk such nonsense! "
The old man kept silent, but he was obviously turning over this ridiculous notion in his head.
In her annoyance Emerald raced on in front, swinging the torch from side to side.
"Steady on, child!
If I fall into the river, this duck will get away. "
"Who wants their duck? "
Knowing why she was annoyed, the old man sang the shanty of oarsmen shooting the rapids.
Though his voice was gruff, he sang clearly.
Emerald listened, then halted suddenly to ask:
"Grandad, is your boat going down the Green Wave Rapids? "
Instead of answering, he went on singing.
Both knew that Number Two was at Green Wave Rapids, but neither guessed what was in the other's mind.
Without further speech the old man and girl made their way home.
At the ferry, his substitute had the boat waiting.
They crossed to the hut and stripped off the wrappings round the zong zi.
After the meal the other man rose to leave, and Emerald made haste to light a torch for him.
When they had crossed the stream, she and her grandfather stood in the boat while their friend climbed up the hill.
"Grandad! "
said Emerald.
"Watch the outlaw climb the mountain! "
One day the old ferryman has words with one of his passengers, refusing to take the money which this paper merchant proffers.
The latter insists till the old man takes offence and forces him to pocket his cash.
But once across, the fellow leaps ashore tossing a handful of coppers on to the boat, then hurries off grinning broadly.
The ferryman has to hold the boat till the others have disembarked, so he cannot give chase.
He shouts to Emerald, who is on the hill:
"Nab that paper merchant, Emerald!
Don't let him go! "
The mystified girl and Brownie block the man's way.
"Please let me pass! "
he says, smiling.
"No!
You stop here! "
Another merchant, coming up, explains the situation.
Then Emerald clutches the man's gown, saying: "No, you don't!"
To show his agreement, Brownie sets up a furious barking.
The rest of the travellers laugh: they are all held up.
Along comes the ferryman, panting, to thrust the coins into the offender's hand and stick a sheaf of tobacco on his load, after which he rubs his hands, smiling, and cries, "Go ahead!
You can be on your way!"
Amidst laughter, the merchants proceed.
"I thought that man had robbed or quarrelled with you, grandad," says Emerald.
"The fellow thrust a whole fistful of money at me.
When I said I didn't want it, we had words.
That's no way to behave! "
"Did you give it all back? "
He purses his lips and shakes his head with a knowing wink, then extracts from his girdle the ten-cent coin he has kept and gives it to her, saying:
"It's not the gift but the thought that counts!
I kept one coin.
He got my tobacco, enough to smoke all the way to Zhengan Town. "
Drums are pounding in the distance again, and Brownie pricks up his ears.
Emerald asks her grandfather if he can hear anything.
After listening for a minute, he recognizes the sound and says:
"The Dragon Boat Festival's come round again.
Remember that fat duck Tianbao gave you last year?
This morning Number One set off with a party to eastern Sichuan.
He asked after you on the ferry.
I dare say you've forgotten how it rained that day.
If we go again, we'll have to come back by torchlight.
Remember the torch we took to light our way? "
The girl's mind has been full of the festival two years before.
In reply to this question, however, she shakes her head rather sulkily and says, "I'd forgotten.
I don't remember a thing."
What she means is: "Get along with you!
Of course I remember. "
Her grandfather, knowing this, goes on, "The year before was even more of a lark, when you waited by the river all alone and nearly didn't come back.
You were so late, I thought a big fish had eaten you. "
Emerald starts laughing softly.
"You thought a big fish had eaten me, grandad?
No!
That was somebody else's idea.
I told you about it.
All you cared about that day was getting your old crony from town to finish the wine in your gourd.
What a memory you have! "
"My memory's not what it used to be.
You're big enough now to go to town alone, lass, without being afraid the fish will eat you. "
"I'm big enough to stay and mind the boat."
"An old fellow like me ought to mind it. "
"An old fellow like you ought to rest. "
"I'm not too old yet, child, to fight a tiger!"
He flexes his arms to show his firm, youthful muscles.
"If you don't believe me, Emerald, just feel that! "
She looks in silence at his white hair and bent back.
A trumpet blares some way off.
She knows where the sound comes from and what it means.
She makes the old man cross with her to the home side and climbs to the pagoda behind their hut to get the first possible glimpse of the bridal sedan-chair.
Presently the procession arrives: two trumpeters, four sturdy villagers, an empty sedan-chair and a young fellow in new clothes who looks like an officer's son.
There are also two sheep led by a boy, a vat of wine, a box of rice-cakes, and a porter to carry the gifts.
Emerald and her grandfather follow this troop on board, and while the old man ferries across she stands by the chair to feast her eyes on its splendour and on the faces around her.
Upon reaching the bank, the youth like an officer's son takes money wrapped in red paper from his embroidered waistband and hands it to the old man.
Since this is a local custom, the ferryman has to accept.
But taking money loosens his tongue.
He inquires where groom and bride are from, then asks their names, then their ages.
No sooner is his curiosity satisfied than one of the trumpeters mounts the bank and starts blaring away again, while the little procession begins climbing the hill.
The old man and girl remain on the boat, but their hearts follow the trumpet a long way before returning.
Fingering the red paper package, the old man remarks, "This bride from Song Family Village is only fifteen. "
Emerald knows what he means and says nothing, quietly tugging the barge back again.
Three days before the festival Emerald and her grandfather agree that he shall mind the boat while she takes Brownie to Shun Shun's house to watch the race.
After refusing at first, she agrees to this.
But the next day she changes her mind, insisting that either both go or both stay with the boat.
She is torn between wanting a bit of fun and concern for him, as the ferryman well knows.
Why should an old fogey like himself spoil her pleasure?
"What's wrong with you, Emerald?"
he asks with a smile.
"Going back on your word like that!
I'm ashamed of you.
A Chatong girl should stick to her word.
None of this shilly-shallying!
My memory's not so bad that I forget your promise the next minute."
Though he talks like this he agrees with his granddaughter; but he dislikes anything that smacks of deceit.
Since he says no more, Emerald asks, "If I go, who'll keep you company? "
"I'll have the boat for company. "
The girl knits her brows with a scornful laugh.
"The boat, eh?
That's all you think of!
Your one treasure, grandad, is that precious boat."
The old man is thinking, "One day you'll be leaving me."
But keeping his thoughts to himself, he goes to the small plot of scallions behind their hut.
Emerald tags after him.
"I'm not going, grandad.
The boat can go while I keep you company. "
"All right, Emerald.
If you won't go, I will.
I'll wear a red flower and be an old country bumpkin going in to see the sights of the town."
The two of them laugh heartily at this and leave the dispute unsettled.
While the old man does some weeding, his granddaughter picks a big scallion to use as a whistle.
When someone hails them from the eastern bank, she races down before her grandfather can go, jumps aboard and sets off quickly to meet the traveller.
As she goes, she calls out:
"Sing something, grandad!
Sing!"
Instead of singing, he waves to her in silence from the cliff.
The old man is worried, seriously concerned.
His granddaughter has grown up.
Emerald is no longer a child.
The slightest thoughtless remark sets her blushing.
Time is ripening her, filling her heart with a new hunger.
She loves to see young brides, painted and powdered, to repeat stories about them, to wear wild flowers in her hair, to listen to songs - already she thrills to the plaintive Chatong serenades.
Sometimes, as if disinclined for company, she sits all alone on a rock staring raptly at a cloud or star in the sky.
If her grandfather asks what she is thinking about, she looks confused and retorts:"I was watching a duck-fight" - in other words, "Nothing in particular."
But at the same time if she questions herself, the answer is: "My thoughts were far, far away.
But I don't know just what I was thinking about."
She dreams, but cannot put her dreams into words.
She is blooming like a flower and has reached the age when each month something wonderful and mysterious happens to her, making her pensive and dreamy.
Her grandfather knows what this means to a girl, and it affects him too.
Although he has lived close to nature for seventy years, there are some natural happenings he hardly knows how to cope with.
The fact that Emerald is growing up reminds him of events long past which have been hidden behind more recent happenings.
These memories weigh heavily on him.
Emerald's mother was exactly like her: the same long eyebrows, big eyes, rosy cheeks.
The same pretty ways to steal her father's heart, whether by the flutter of her eyelashes or her quick intelligence.
You'd have thought the girl could never bear to leave home.
But then, as ill luck would have it , she met that soldier.
And in the end she left her father and child to follow her lover to the grave.
In the ferryman's view, no one was to blame, the whole fault lay with Heaven.
He neither storms against Heaven nor reproaches man, though his heart revolts against their unhappy fate.
He is still too young, in this respect, to resign himself to the inevitable.
It seems too unjust that this should happen to him.
But now there is Emerald.
If she goes the same way as her mother, can he bring up another little orphan?
Man proposes, god disposes!
He has reached the age to rest.
He has surely had his share of the hard work and misfortune that are the lot of good Chinese country folk.
If there really is a Jade Emperor up in the sky, with hands skilful enough to control the whole of creation, obviously the fairest, most reasonable thing would be to take him first, leaving the young to the happiness or sorrow that fall to their share in life.
But this is not the old ferryman's view.
He takes such thought for Emerald that sometimes he lies on the rock at his door staring up at the stars as he ponders her predicament.
Death cannot be long now in coming.
The very fact that Emerald is nearly a woman shows how old he himself has grown.
But come what may he must fix things up for the girl.
Her poor mother has left her in his charge, and now the child has reached the age when he must find a trustworthy husband for her and tie everything up neatly to finish his job.
Who is the right man?
What sort of fellow will treat her decently?
A few days previously, when Tianbao took the ferry, the frank, impetuous youngster's first words to the old man were:
"Uncle, your Emerald's grown into a fine girl, a regular Guan Yin.
In a couple of years, if I'm able to roost in Chatong instead of flying off in all directions, I'll come to this stream every night to serenade her!"
The old man greeted this outspoken avowal with a smile.
As he hauled the boat, he kept his small faded eyes on Number One, as if to say: "Words spoken in jest may be taken in good earnest.
I'm not angry.
Go ahead."
Number One went on :
"Emerald's so lovely, I'm afraid all she's fit for is listening to our Chatong songs, not running a house like one of our Chatong girls.
I want a sweetheart to listen to my songs, but I need a good wife who'll manage my household well.
I want to eat my cake and have it.
That's me!"
Slowly the old man manoeuvred the boat round till its stern was level with the bank, before replying:
"Stranger things have happened, Number One.
Wait and see!"
Just what exactly might happen he did not say.
After Tianbao's departure the old man, both worried and pleased, chewed over the young fellow's frank declaration.
He must find Emerald a husband who will care for her.
But will the girl agree?
A fine rain sets in at dawn on the fifth, the water upstream has begun to rise, and the whole river turns pea-green.
In a palm-fibre cape the ferryman leaves for town with his shopping basket, his big gourd for wine and a pouch holding six hundred coins over his shoulder.
Because it is a festival, crowds of villagers have risen early to go into town with goods to sell and money for purchases.
Emerald, left in charge of the boat with Brownie for company, puts on a new straw hat and ferries load after load of passengers.
Brownie sits in the bow and adds to the general amusement by leaping ashore with the rope the moment they touch land.
Some villagers have brought their own dogs along.
But a dog becomes a different creature away from home and, even at their masters' side, these look meek and mild.
Brownie pads over to sniff at them on the boat till reminded by a glance from Emerald that he must behave.
Once he has finished his work with the rope, However, he follows any strange dogs up the hill, frisking round them of barking playfully at their owners.
"Here, Brownie!"
Emerald shouts, stamping her foot.
"Are you off your head?
We've work to do!"
Then he slinks back and sniffs all over the deck.
"What's the fuss about?"
Emerald asks.
"Who taught you to carry on like that?
Lie down!"
At once Brownie flops down obediently in his place, barking softly, reminiscently, from time to time.
The rain comes down steadily, the stream is misted over.
In intervals between her work Emerald visualizes what her grandfather must be doing.
She knows where he is going, whom he will meet, what he will say, what the city gate and waterfront will be like today.
She can see it all distinctly in her mind's eye.
She knows all her grandfather's ways.
Upon meeting any acquaintance, he will give the traditional greeting: "Here's to good eating and drinking, friend, today!"
The other will generally answer, "The same to you, ferryman!"
But if the reply is: "Not likely!
Four ounces of meat and two bowls of wine aren't enough to fill my stomach or make me tipsy," her grandfather will beg the man to come and drink all he wants at Green Stream.
If asked for a drink from his gourd, the warm-hearted old man makes haste to hand it over.
If soldiers of the garrison lick their lips and praise the wine, they are urged to take another swig.
Since the gourd soon empties this way, he runs back to the shop to get it filled again.
He also goes to the wharf to talk to the boatmen on junks newly arrived and inquire the price of oil and rice down river.
Sometimes he creeps into the cabin redolent of kelp, fish, oil, vinegar and smoke; the boatmen like to give him a handful of red dates from their store, dates which make up to Emerald for his tardy return.
Merchants on the waterfront give him zong zi and other good things in appreciation of his faithful service.
They force him to take these for all his laughing protests: "My old bones will give way under such a load!"
And when he goes to buy a little pork, no one asks him for money.
If he threatens to take his custom elsewhere, the butcher retorts: "Why be so difficult, grandad?
I'm not trying to kill you!"
But no, to him this is almost like blood-money.
He reckons up the price and stuffs the coins hastily into the till, then walks off with the meat.
The butcher, knowing him, chooses the best cut and gives him overweight.
"Hey, boss!"
the ferryman cries.
"Let's be fair!
You don't have to do me any favour.
The leg's for educated men in town who want to fry tender slivers of meat with their fish.
A fine fool you're making me look.
The scrag end will do for a boatman like me.
All I want's a hunk to stew with carrots to go with my wine."
Then, taking the meat, he hands over the money he has counted out and asks the butcher to check it.
The latter does nothing of the sort, just dropping the coins with a clatter into the till.
Then the old man walks off beaming, leaving the butcher and other customers laughing...
Her grandfather is bound to call on Shun Shun too.
Going over both festivals in her mind, happily savouring all she has seen and heard, Emerald has the same sensation as when she closes her eyes in bed in the morning and sees a yellow sunflower just out of reach.
Something exciting lies ahead, as yet indistinct and intangible, but too lovely to let go.
"Is there really a tiger at White Cocks'?comb?"
she wonders, for no apparent reason.
White Cocks'?comb is over two hundred li away, in the middle reaches of the You.
Then she thinks: "Thirty-two men pulling on six great oars, stamping their feet and singing...
When there's a wind they hoist a big sail made of a hundred lengths of white cloth.
What fun to cross Lake Dongting in a boat like that..." She has no idea of the size of Lake Dongting and has never seen such a large boat.
For the life of her, she cannot explain this strange fancy.
More people arrive: coolies, government runners, a mother and her daughter.
The mother is dressed in neat, freshly starched blue cotton; the girl's cheeks are rouged, her new finery fits none too well.
They are off to watch the boatrace with friends in town.
When all are aboard, Emerald starts across, her eyes on the girl who strikes her as thirteen or fourteen and a pampered creature who has never left her mother.
Her freshly polished, pointed leather shoes are muddied.
Her pants of purple and green have a fancy border.
She returns Emerald's stare from eyes as bright as crystal, in which shy embarrassment and friendliness mingle.
The mother asks Emerald her age.
She laughs and counters by asking her daughter's age.
Told it is thirteen, she smiles.
The woman is obviously a rich landowner's wife.
The girl, Emerald notices with a stab of envy, is wearing flashing bracelets of chased silver.
When they reach the bank and start trooping ashore, the woman presses a handful of coins on Emerald, who forgets her grandfather's injunction either to express thanks or return the tip, so busy is she watching the girl.
The group has nearly reached the top of the hill when she overtakes them and gives back the money.
"It's for you!"
says the woman.
But with a vigorous shake of her head before any more can be said Emerald runs off.
On the other bank men are shouting for the ferry.
She goes over and finds seven passengers, two of them girls spruced up for the occasion but not really pretty.
Not a patch, she decides, on the other.
Many people take the ferry today, including more girls than usual.
As she pulls on the hawser she memorizes their faces: pretty, freckled, odd, sly or redeyed.
When no one comes she waits for her grandfather, and when he fails to come she compares the looks of the girls and chants softly:
The tiger eats the captain's daughter first;
Most girls have gold and silver for their hair;
Poor Emerald is the one who comes off worst -
No trinkets, nothing but bean-sprouts to wear!
The next passengers from town tell Emerald they have seen the old ferryman at the door of a tavern on the waterfront, offering his newly filled gourd to a young boatman.
She smiles at the old man's ill-timed hospitality.
The passengers gone, she stays on the boat, chanting the incantation to welcome spirits in the twelfth month:
Great gods above, look down on us!
Our lads are true and bold;
Our old folk drink, they toil and sleep,
Our babes stand hunger, cold.
Here oxen plough, ewes lamb, hens lay,
Girls weave and sing and look for love;
Stout door-gods guard each homestead here!
Come down, immortals, from above!
Ride gently through the clouds to earth below!
Sit steady, Chang!
And Iron-crutch Li, go slow!
Abundance is your gift to men,
Propitious winds and timely rain;
Good rice and wine are laid for you,
And fat pork sizzling in the pan!
Sparrow-hawk Guo and Iron-spear Wang
Spare neither man nor beast;
Some kill and burn, some do no wrong;
Come one and all to feast!
So eat and drink and take your ease,
Then cross the moonlit river in the breeze;
We'll see the drunkards home and think no wrong,
And on the way strike up another song!
This gay, haunting melody has an undertone of sadness, making Emerald feel a pang of loneliness.
Her thoughts fly to the bonfires and drumming in the fields to welcome the spirits at the end of autumn.
Meanwhile drums sound up in the distance.
The long crimson dragon boats will soon be starting their race.
A light rain falls steadily, the stream is misted over.
The ferryman comes home laden with packages in time for the morning meal.
From the top of the hill he calls out to Emerald to fetch him.
So many people have gone into town, she has grown desperately impatient, but her grandfather's voice restores her good humour at once and she warbles: "Coming, grandad!"
Once aboard, the old man plumps all his things in the bow, then helps Emerald ferry across, smiling at her sheepishly and ingenuously.
"You must have thought I was never coming, eh?"
But instead of scolding him, she teases: "I know what you were up to , grandad, standing drinks on the waterfront!"
She knows he likes nothing better than a bit of fun in town, but she swallows the reproach on the tip of her tongue, not wanting to upset him.
Sizing up the packages in the bow, she sees his wine gourd has disappeared, and giggles.
"No one can call you stingy, grandad.
You not only treat all your friends and the boatmen to drinks, but even let them swallow up your wine gourd."
"Nothing of the sort!"
he retorts with a grin.
"Shun Shun took my gourd away.
When he saw me standing drinks down there, he said, 'Hey, this will never do, ferryman!
You're not a brewer!
If you want to live up to the heroes of Liangshan, give me that gourd and let me drink the lot.'
Those were his very words.
'Let me drink the lot.'
So I handed over my gourd.
I thought he was having me on.
No lack of wine in his house, is there, Emerald?..."
"You think he was having you on?
He didn't really want your wine?"
"That's it .
But why?"
"That's easy.
So that you wouldn't go on treating people right and left till all your wine was gone.
Presently he'll send it over, see if he doesn't."
"You really think so?"
They have reached the bank now and Emerald makes haste to help him with the parcels.
All he lets her take, however, are the fish and his embroidered pouch, no money in it now but a package of sugar and another of sesame cakes.
They have barely stowed the stuff away when someone hails the ferry.
Warning Emerald to put the meat where wild cats cannot get it, the old man hurries down to the stream.
He returns before long with his passenger, laughing and chatting.
"You guessed right, Emerald!"
he calls.
"He's sent back my gourd!"
Before she can go out to the kitchen, in comes her grandfather with a dark, broad-shouldered young man.
She smiles at this youth while the old man goes on talking.
The visitor smiles back.
As if aware why, she slips into the kitchen to light the stove.
When someone else hails the ferry she rushes down to the boat and takes it across.
Then another passenger comes.
In spite of the rain, far more people are out than usual.
Emerald makes three trips, wondering as she works the boat what her grandfather is looking so pleased about.
The young man who has brought the gourd has a strangely familiar face.
Where can they have met?
Unwilling to trouble her head about him, she gives up trying to guess.
"Emerald!"
calls her grandfather from the cliff.
"Come up and rest and keep our guest company."
She has been meaning to go back and light the fire, but at this she pretends not to have heard the summons.
When the visitor asks if they mean to watch the race, the ferryman says, "I must mind the boat.
So many folk are going into town today."
They talk for a while of other things.
Then the young man says what is uppermost in his heart:
"What a pretty girl your Emerald's grown into, uncle!"
Smiling, the ferryman thinks, "He's just as outspoken as his brother!"
He replies, "If anyone hereabouts should be praised for looks, it's you, Number Two!
'Brave as a panther, handsome as a cock' - that's you!"
"Not a bit of it."
"Why not?
I heard them say you saved three men's lives when your junk foundered in the rapids at White Cocks'?comb below the gorges.
You spent the night ashore, and the village girls after one look at you serenaded your hut all night.
Is that how it was?"
"It wasn't girls serenading us but wolves howling!
That part's known for its wolves.
They were out to get us.
We had to keep big fires going to scare them away."
"Better still!"
The old man laughs.
"Folk say wolves eat only girls, children and handsome lads of eighteen.
One sniff at my old carcass and off they'd go."
"You've seen many summers here, uncle," says Number Two.
"Outsiders say there's something about our district that produces outstanding men.
Why have we none now?"
"Men who make a name?
I don't care if we've none of those.
We've intelligent, honest, brave, hard-working youngsters - that's good enough for me.
Men like your father and the two of you are a credit to us here."
"I agree with you, uncle.
We don't turn out rascals but good fellows like you.
At your age, you're still sturdy and sound as a nanmu tree, steady, decent and open-handed - that's something to be proud of."
"Don't talk about an old crock like me.
I've had my share of sun and rain, long journeys and heavy loads.
I've had my fill of food and drink, as well as hunger and cold.
Soon I'll be lying in the clammy ground, food for the worms.
The world belongs to you youngsters.
Just do your best and it won't let you down.
But don't let the days go by in vain."
"You set up an example of hard work, uncle, we young ones won't let the days go by in vain."
Presently Number Two says he must go, and the old man walks to the door to call Emerald to get their meal while he sees to the ferry.
She refuses to come and the young man boards the boat.
As she casts off, her grandfather scolds, "Aren't you coming back?
Expect me to turn housewife and cook?
That's your job, lass!"
Glancing out of the corner of her eyes, Emerald finds that the young man is watching her.
She turns her head, pursing her lips without a word, and self-consciously sets to work.
As the boat glides slowly across, Number Two stands in the bow and says:
"After lunch, won't you come with your grandad to our house on the waterfront to watch the race?"
Forced to make some reply, she answers, "Grandad says he's not going.
There's no one to mind the boat."
"What about you?"
"I shan't go unless he does."
"You're going to mind the boat?"
"I'll stay with my grandad."
"Suppose I get someone to come and take your place?"
The prow grates on the bank as the boat draws alongside.
Number Two jumps ashore and turns on the slope to say:
"Much obliged, Emerald!...
I'll go back and send someone along.
Hurry up with your meal, then come over to see the race.
There's a good crowd today.
Things are going to be lively."
Emerald wonders why he should insist on inviting them.
Dimpling, she ferries back.
Reaching home, she sees the young man standing on the opposite hill as if still waiting for something.
She goes into the kitchen to light the fire, and as she puts damp straw in the stove asks her grandfather, busy sampling the wine just brought:
"Grandad, he says he's going back to find someone to mind the boat while we watch the race.
Will you go?"
"You want to?"
"If we both go.
I liked that young man.
I'm sure I've seen him before.
What's his name?"
The old man thinks: "Good, he likes you too!"
He chuckles.
"Don't you remember a young chap on the waterfront two years ago who said the big fish would eat you?"
Emerald understands in a flash, but pretending not to she repeats: "Who is he?"
"Can't you think?
Have a guess."
"How can I guess?
Chang the Third or Li the Fourth?"
"He's Wharf-master Shun Shun's second son.
He remembers you even if you don't remember him!"
The old man smacks his lips as if savouring something else as well as the wine.
"Very good!"
he murmurs.
"Luck's with us."
A shout sounds from the ferry.
Still muttering, "Good, luck's with us," he hurries down to the boat.
They are at table when the next summons comes and Emerald, hurrying to the other bank, finds the boatman sent by Shun Shun to take over.
He tells her: "Number Two's gone down to the river.
He wants you to go straight from your meal to his house."
He repeats this message word for word to the ferryman.
Straining her ears, Emerald catches louder drumming in the distance which conjures up visions of the narrow boats shooting forward from Changtan, leaving long, beautiful wakes.
What a glorious festival this is!
The newcomer takes his place on the boat, refusing all offers of tea and wine with a firm shake of his head.
"Suppose I don't go, Emerald, but you take Brownie?"
suggests the ferryman.
"I don't want to go without you."
"And if I go?"
"I hadn't meant to go, but I'll keep you company."
The old man chuckles.
"Come on then, lass, and keep me company.
Mind you don't lose me!"
They make their way to the river bank and find it crowded with people.
The rain has stopped but the ground is damp.
Her grandfather urges her to watch from the wharf-master's house on stilts, but for some reason Emerald chooses to stay where she is.
Before long, though, Shun Shun sends men to invite them in.
His house is fairly full.
The landowner's wife and daughter who caught Emerald's eye this morning are seated as guests of honour at the two best windows.
The girl, noticing Emerald, cries, "Come over here!"
Emerald goes shyly over to sit on the bench behind her.
A little later her grandfather wanders off.
Instead of watching the race, the old man lets a friend take him half a li upstream to see a new watermill.
He is fascinated by this mill built on the water's edge, a hill behind it.
A round millstone is attached to a hardwood axis and slightly tilted over a stone receptacle.
When the sluice-gate opens, the current sets the lower wheel turning and the millstone revolves rapidly above.
The man in charge needs only to pour unhulled paddy into the receptacle and take out polished rice which he sifts in rectangular sieves to separate the bran.
Bran lies everywhere, underfoot as well as over his shoulders and white turban.
In fine weather he cultivates little plots of turnips, cabbage, garlic and scallion nearby.
If his dam caves in, he whips off his trousers and wades into the river for pebbles to mend it.
Once he has a good solid embankment, he can fix up a small fish pond.
In high water fish will sweep over his dam, caught without his lifting a finger!
Obviously the job is more interesting and varied than looking after a ferry.
But no ferryman can dream of owning a mill like this.
All the mills in these parts belong to landowners.
The ferryman's friend tells him who the owner is as they chat and look around.
"They take it easy up there in the Zhongzhai hills," he says, kicking the new millstone.
"But they like to buy property down here by the river.
This belongs to Captain Wang of Zhongzhai.
Cost him seven hundred strings of cash."
Envious and admiring, the ferryman's small eyes are taking in and sizing up everything there.
Nodding his head he makes appropriate comments on every object in the mill.
As the two of them sit down on a freshly planed bench, his friend tells him this mill will most likely be the dowry of the captain's daughter.
That reminds him of Emerald and a commission he has.
"How old is your Emerald, uncle?"
"Foureen, getting on for fifteen."
Her grandfather casts his mind back.
"She's a capable lass for fourteen.
Whoever gets her is a lucky man."
"Lucky?
She's no mill as dowry.
Nothing but herself."
"That's no way to talk.
A pair of clever hands is worth five mills.
Didn't Lu Ban build Luoyang Bridge with his two hands?..."
Having refuted the old man, he laughs.
The ferryman is smiling too, thinking, "I don't see Emerald building any Luoyang Bridge."
The other goes on presently:
"Our Chatong youngsters have sharp eyes when it comes to choosing wives.
Mind if I tell you a joke, uncle?"
"What joke?"
"You can take it in earnest, if you like."
"So he's acting as go-between!"
thinks the old man.
"Well, go on."
It seems that Shun Shun's Number One is very much taken with Emerald and has asked this fellow to sound out the ferryman.
He ends by explaining, "I asked: 'Are you joking, Number One, or in earnest?'
He said, 'Go and sound out the ferryman.
I love Emerald and want to marry her - I'm in earnest.'
I told him, 'I'm blunt and tactless.
Suppose I put my foot in it and the old man bashes me?'
He said, 'Start off as if you were joking and he won't bash you.'
That's why I told you it was a joke, uncle.
Think it over.
He'll be back on the ninth.
What answer shall I give him?"
The old man, recalling what Number One has told him, knows the lad is in earnest and that Shun Shun is partial to his granddaughter too.
His spirits soar.
But according to local custom, no proposal can be seriously considered till the suitor has sent over gifts of cakes.
He says, "When he comes back tell him: 'After listening to your joke, the old codger told one of his own.'
He said, 'Chess has its rules: the castles and knights have to move in different ways.
If Number One wants to be a castle, he can get his father to approach me through a go-between.
If he wants to be a knight, he can stand on the hill opposite our hut and serenade Emerald for three years and six months.
Then it's for the girl to decide.'"
"If singing for three years and six months will win Emerald's heart, I'll start serenading her myself tomorrow!"
"You think once the girl's willing, I might not agree?"
"No.
If you're willing, Emerald is bound to agree."
"Not a bit of it.
She's the one to whom it matters."
"Maybe.
But the decision's up to you.
Three years and six months of singing count less than a good word from you."
"I tell you what: When he comes back, get him to talk it over with his father.
And I'll see how Emerald feels.
If she chooses to be serenaded, you must ask Number One to take the knight's roundabout way."
"Good.
I'll tell him, 'Number One, I wasn't bashed for my joke.
The serious business now depends on your fate.'
That's true enough.
But I know very well you hold his fate in your hands."
"Don't say that, brother.
If it was up to me, I'd clinch right away!"
This discussion over, the two of them go off to see a big new junk Shun Shun has bought.
Meanwhile there have been developments in the wharf-master's house on stilts.
Emerald is a little uncomfortable for all the fine view she has behind the other girl.
The spectators crowded round the other windows keep glancing away from the river at them both.
Some even find pretexts to cross the room to have a closer look.
Emerald wishes she had some excuse to run away.
Soon guns boom over the river and a row of boats shoot out from the opposite bank.
For a while four of these hold abreast like four arrows cleaving the water.
Halfway across, two boats move into the lead, and before long one of these spurts ahead to be greeted by another salvo as it reaches the Customs House.
The victorious crew belongs to the waterfront and fire-crackers near and far salute their triumph.
They are rowing past the front now, greeted by a great rolling of drums and roar of approval from the river bank and houses on stilts.
Emerald's eyes are on the red-turbaned cox in the bow, who is setting the course with his flags.
That is Number Two who brought the gourd to Green Stream.
Her thoughts fly back two years.
"Mind a big fish doesn't bite you!"
"Whether it bites me or not is none of your business!"
"All right, if that's how you feel."
"Never mind him, Brownie!"
She glances round to discover that the dog has gone and leaves her seat to find him, forgetting the lad in the boat.
As she searches through the crowd she hears snatches of conversation.
A fat-faced woman is asking, "Who's that girl in the best seat at the middle window?"
Someone answers, "The daughter of Landlord Wang up in the hills.
Watching a race is one way of looking the family over, and of letting them look you over!
She's a lucky girl, all right!"
"Who's looking whom over?"
"Didn't you know?
Landlord Wang wants her to marry into Shun Shun's family."
"Which son - Number One or Number Two?"
"They say Number Two.
You'll see our Yue Yun soon.
He'll be coming to pay his respects to his mother-in?law."
Another woman puts in, "It's a fine match they've fixed up.
That girl's dowry is a brand-new mill by the river.
A mill like that does the work of ten hired hands."
"Does Number Two like the idea?"
asks someone else.
"No, he doesn't!"
puts in another emphatically.
"He says he doesn't want any part of that mill!"
"Were those Yue Yun's actual words?"
"So someone told me.
Said Number Two's lost his heart to the girl at the ferry."
"Is he fool enough to choose a ferry instead of a mill?"
"Who knows?
Every man to his taste.
To him, a ferry-boat's better than a mill."
These gossips keep their eyes on the river so that no one notices Emerald just behind them.
The girl walks on, her cheeks burning, only to hear more comments on the same theme.
"It's all settled.
Just waiting for Number Two to agree."
"Look at the form he was in today!
He knew the eyes of a pretty girl were on him!"
What pretty girl?
Emerald does not know what to think.
She is too short to see over the others' shoulders.
The drumming is closer and louder now, and so is the shouting on the bank.
Number Two's boat must be passing just below.
The whole room starts cheering and yelling Nuosong's name.
Someone next to Mrs Wang lets off fire-crackers.
Then cries of dismay go up and people start rushing down to the river.
Emerald wonders rather uneasily what has happened.
Before she can decide whether to sit down again or stay where she is, a servant brings in a great dish of zong zi and sweetmeats for Mrs Wang and her daughter.
At that she decides to slip out.
But walking down the path beneath an overhanging salt shop, she runs into a group escorting red-turbaned Number Two, who has slipped and had a ducking.
Although she shrinks back, the path is so narrow that the others brush her in passing.
Number Two says:
"So you came, Emerald!
Your grandad too?"
Blushing and silent, she wonders, "Where's Brownie got to?"
"Why don't you watch from my house?"
asks Number Two.
"I told them to keep a good place for you."
She is thinking, "A mill's not a dowry to be sniffed at."
Number Two cannot force her to go back and so they part, Emerald walking down to the river with very mixed feelings.
Not indignant, no.
Not anxious.
Not happy either - what cause has she to be happy?
Cross, that is it, cross with herself and others too.
The river bank is jammed.
Even the shallow water by the wharf, the junks moored near by and the pillars of the houses on stilts are swarming with people.
"All this fuss about nothing!"
she mutters.
She searches the junk for her grandfather, but sees no sign of him.
Squeezing her way back to the water's edge, she spots Brownie with one of Shun Shun's servants watching the fun from an empty boat a few dozen feet from the shore.
Emerald calls the dog sharply a couple of times.
Brownie pricks up his ears and looks round, then dives into the water and swims over.
Reaching her side, sopping wet, he shakes himself before bounding up and down.
"Quiet, Brownie!"
she cries.
"Steady on!
Your boat didn't capsize - why jump into the water?"
They set off together to look for the ferryman, and find him in front of a timber yard.
"Emerald," he tells her, "I've just seen a fine mill.
Brand-new from the millstone and water-wheel to the thatch on the roof.
The mill dam holds back a rapid stream and when the sluice-gates are opened the wheel turns like a whirligig."
"Whose is it? "
she asks.
"It belongs to Captain Wang up in the hills.
I've heard it's his daughter's dowry.
They've pots of money.
Cost seven hundred strings of cash to build, not counting the windmill and the tackle."
"Who's going to marry his daughter?"
He snorts with laughter.
"Mind a big fish doesn't eat you!"
In spite of what she has heard, the girl persists: "Who's going to get that mill, grandad?"
"Yue Yun!
Number Two!"
Her grandfather goes on, half to himself, "Some people envy him.
Some envy the mill."
"Who envies him, grandad?"
"I do, for one."
"You've been drinking again!"
"But Number Two says you're a pretty girl!"
"You're tipsy, grandad!"
"I'm not tipsy... Come on, let's go to the bank and watch them chase ducks.
Pity I'm too old to dive in and catch one to broil with ginger."
He is on the point of adding, "Number Two will surely give us the ducks he nabs," when there is Number Two before them, smiling at Emerald, who dimples and smiles back.
The three of them return to Shun Shun's house.
Sure enough, someone comes bearing gifts to Green Stream, the go-between sent by Shun Shun to approach the ferryman on behalf of his son.
The sight of the cake in red paper flusters the old man, who quickly ferries the go-between across and takes him home.
Emerald, shelling peas at the door, pays no special attention to the visitor.
But when his very first words are "Congratulations!"
she guesses what is afoot.
Jumping up as if to shoo away the hens from their vegetables, whirling a bamboo cane she runs towards the pagoda.
After some preliminary small talk, the go-between gets down to business.
The old ferryman twists his big gnarled hands in confusion, and while his whole attitude proclaims "This is too good to be true!"
he says not a word.
The go-between, his message delivered, waits for an answer.
Smiling and nodding, the ferryman says, "I'm glad Number One's chosen the straightforward way.
But I must ask the girl and see what she thinks."
Having seen the go-between off, he calls Emerald down to the boat.
She comes aboard holding a basket of peas and asks impishly, "What is it, grandad?"
He chuckles and cocks his shaggy white head to look at her in silence for some minutes.
Emerald sits down rather self-consciously and bends over her peas, while a golden oriole bursts into song in a far-away bamboo grove.
"The days are long now," she thinks.
"And grandad takes a long time coming to the point!"
Her heart is beating fast.
"Well, Emerald, " says the old man presently.
"Do you know what that fellow came for?"
"No, I don't."
Her face and neck flush red.
Her grandfather guesses her feelings.
His eyes on the horizon, he sees Emerald's mother as she was sixteen years before and his heart aches for her.
"Boats have a wharf, birds have a nest," he murmurs.
Though his heart bleeds for his dead daughter, he forces a smile.
Meanwhile the song of the orioles and nightingales in the hills, the thud of the woodcutter's axe in the bamboo grove, have set Emerald's thoughts racing back over all she has seen or heard: the stories of man-eating tigers, the four-verse folk-songs sung by two rivals, the square pit in a paper-mill, the molten iron that spatters from the forge... She is trying to close her eyes to the choice before her, has not, indeed, grasped exactly what is involved.
"Emerald," says her grandfather, "Wharf-master Shun Shun sent a go-between over to ask for you to be his daughter-in?law.
I'm old, with one foot in the grave, of course I'm willing.
But this is your affair.
Tell me what you think.
Either way you choose is all right with me."
She has no idea what to say.
Trying to collect herself, she shoots an appealing glance at her grandfather.
Without knowing more, how can she answer?
"Number One's got the makings of a fine man," says the old ferryman.
"He's straight and big-hearted.
He'd make you a good husband."
So the go-between came from Number One!
Emerald's heart misses a beat, her cheeks burn.
Unable to look up, she goes on shelling peas, flicking the empty pods into the water as if watching them float lazily away will help her get a grip on herself.
When she makes no answer, her grandfather laughs.
"Think it over for a few days, child," he says.
"Luoyang Bridge wasn't built in a day.
You've plenty of time.
The first time this fellow broached it to me I said: Castles and knights have different moves.
If you want me to decide, send a go-between over and do it the straightforward way.
If you want Emerald to decide, let him serenade her for three years and six months - the roundabout way.
If you like the knight's way, child, I'm sure he'll sing you fiery songs under the sun and sweet songs in the moonlight - singing like a nightingale till he spits blood!"
Emerald cannot speak.
For no reason, she wants to cry.
The old man goes on to talk of her dead mother.
Then at last he falls silent.
Stealing a glance at him, she sees to her dismay that his eyes are red.
"What's the matter, grandad?"
she whispers.
He simply kneads his eyes with clumsy fists.
Then, laughing like a boy, he leaps ashore and hurries home.
Emerald is too flurried to run after him.
The sun after rain strikes hot on her shoulders and head.
The rushes and willows by the stream and the vegetables in their plot are growing in rank profusion.
Green locusts are flitting through the grass, their wings whirring.
The shrilling of small cicadas in the branches has not yet swelled into a mighty chorus but it is gaining strength.
Among the vivid emerald bamboos on both hillsides, orioles, nightingales and lesser birds are warbling.
Drinking all this in, the girl lets her thoughts wander:
"Grandad's seventy this year... Three years and six months... Who gave us that white duck?...
Lucky man to get the mill, and lucky mill..."
In a pet she jumps up.
Her peas drop into the water.
And as she reaches down to recover the basket, someone hails the ferry from the further shore.
The next day in the vegetable plot her grandfather asks Emerald for her answer.
Her heart pounding, she hangs her head and goes on weeding the scallion bed in silence.
The old man smiles as he thinks, "Better wait.
If I say any more she'll have the whole bed up!"
A shrewd suspicion that she is unwilling makes him hold back.
With a joke, he changes the subject.
Each day now is hotter than the last.
When the warm weather starts just before the sixth month, the ferryman lugs out a dusty earthenware pitcher from a corner and in his spare time makes a round wooden lid for it.
He saws wood for a three-legged stand and hollows out a big bamboo to serve as a dipper.
After this pitcher is moved down to the bank, it is Emerald's job to boil a large pan of water every morning to fill it.
Sometimes they brew tea, sometimes just put in some of the scorched rice from the bottom of the pan.
The old man also, according to his custom, keeps handy various herbal remedies for stomach-ache and boils.
These he presses upon anyone who passes that way looking unwell, explaining that he has learned these cures from the doctors in the army hospital in town.
Bare-armed he stands all day long on his snub-nosed barge, generally bareheaded, his short white hair gleaming like silver in the sunlight.
Emerald runs about singing as merrily as before, or sits under the tree in front of the hut playing her flute.
The old man seems to have forgotten Number One's proposal, and of course the girl makes no reference to it either.
Before long, however, the go-between comes back and the ferryman sends him off just as before with the reply that it all depends on Emerald.
He takes it up with her again but draws a blank.
What the snag is or how to get round it he does not know.
He lies awake at nights thinking things over, till it dawns on him that perhaps she loves the younger brother, not the elder.
Soon convinced that this is the case, he smiles an unnatural smile to hide his dismay, worried by the sudden realization that Emerald is exactly like her mother and may come to the same end!
Assailed by old memories, he cannot sleep.
He slips out of the house to the cliff above the stream and gazes up at the stars, while around him crickets and other insects shrill.
It is long before he can sleep.
Emerald, of course, has no idea of this.
Her days are divided between work and pleasure, and although a secret influence difficult to define is at work within her, at night she sleeps as soundly as ever.
But things cannot go on like this indefinitely.
The peace of their uneventful life is soon to be irrevocably shattered.
In the wharf-master's house Number Two, learning of his elder brother's intention, takes Number One into his confidence.
Both brothers, so devoted to each other, have fallen in love with the ferryman's granddaughter.
That is nothing strange in these parts, where folk have a saying: There is no place on earth where fire cannot spread, water flow, sun and moon shine, or love make its way.
There is nothing extraordinary in the rich wharf-master's sons losing their hearts to a poor girl.
The problem is whether, to decide which shall have her, the two brothers should fight it out as is so often done in Chatong.
The brothers neither come to blows nor step aside for each other in the ridiculous way that city weaklings cede to rivals in love.
They have gone to a dockyard upstream to see their father's new junk, and standing beside the vessel Number One confides in Number Two, adding that it is two years since he fell in love.
Number Two hears him out with a smile.
From the dockyard they set off to Landlord Wang's new mill.
As they come in sight of it, Number One remarks:
"You're the one with the luck, Number Two!
Captain Wang's son-in?law will have a mill.
If all goes well, I ought to take over the ferry for the old man.
Suits me.
I've a good mind to buy both those hills by Green Stream and plant bamboos all round to make a small kingdom of my own!"
Number Two listens in silence, just swinging his scythe at the grass by the road.
In front of the mill he stops to ask his brother:
"If I told you she's got a sweetheart, would you believe me?"
"No!"
"But you do believe this mill is going to be mine?"
"No."
They walk inside.
"Look here, " says Number Two.
"Suppose I tell you I don't want this mill but mean to have that ferry-boat - for two years I've wanted it - would you believe it ?"
Really staggered now, Tianbao stares at Nuosong perched up on the hardwood axle and knows he is telling the truth.
He lunges forward as if to topple him down.
With an understanding smile, he cries, "I believe you!"
Number Two looks him straight in the eyes and tells him frankly:
"You've got to believe me, brother.
I've had this in mind for some time.
If they agree, no matter what our father says, I mean to get that ferry-boat - what about you?"
"I've already spoken to dad and he's sent a match-maker to propose it."
Since this makes him cut a poor figure, he hastens to add, "The old man says there are two ways of going about it - the castle's and the knight's.
I chose the castle's way - it's more direct."
"And then?"
"Nothing's come of it yet.
The old fellow hasn't given a definite answer."
"What's the knight's way?"
"To sing by the stream for three years and six months.
If I could win Emerald's heart that way, I should have her."
"That's not a bad idea."
"Yes, for a tongue-tied fellow some things are easier to sing than to say.
Still, it's no use to me.
I'm no song-bird.
But, Heavens above!
Does he want her to marry a gurgling water-wheel or a proper man?"
"What do you mean to do, then?"
"I'm going to ask the old man for a straight answer: Yes or No.
If it's No, I'll sail with the next boat to Taoyuan.
If it's Yes, I'm willing to take over his job for him."
"How about singing?"
"That's more in your line, Number Two.
If you want to be a song-bird, go ahead.
I won't stuff horse-dung in your mouth."
Number Two can tell from his manner how upset his brother is.
He understands Number One, who has the rough bluntness typical of Chatong.
He will do anything for a fellow he likes but have no truck with someone he despises, not even if the man were his uncle.
It has crossed Number One's mind that if the castle's way fails he might try the knight's; but after Number Two's frank avowal he realizes that he cannot compete here with his brother.
His face is knotted with anger and resentment.
Number Two proposes that both of them go to Green Stream at midnight, not letting on that there are two of them.
They can take it in turn to sing, and the first to get a response can go on serenading the ferryman's granddaughter.
Number One has not much of a voice - Number Two will take his place when his turn comes to sing.
Leave it to fate to decide, he says, that is fairest.
But Number One does not want his brother to sing for him though he knows he is no singer.
His younger brother is such a romantic, however, he insists that this method of his is the fairest.
Number One thinks it over with a wry smile.
"I'm no songster, confound it!
Why should you warble for me?
All right, then, we'll take it in turn.
I don't need your help - I'll paddle my own boat.
No one likes the owl's hoot, but when he calls for his mate he doesn't ask any other bird to help!"
Having reached agreement, they consider the date.
This is the fourteenth.
Tonight and the next two nights there will be a full moon.
It is midsummer, the nights are pleasantly cool.
They will dress in white as the local custom is and climb the hill in the moonlight to serenade the girl of their dreams.
When dew falls, their throats are parched, and it is time to go home, they will make their way back by the fading light of the moon.
Or when they come to a mill that works all night they can lie down to sleep in a warm barn till dawn.
It all sounds quite simple and natural, although neither of them knows what the upshot will be.
They will start tonight on this contest sanctioned by custom.
At dusk Emerald sits behind their hut at the foot of the pagoda watching fleecy clouds turn peach-blossom pink in the sunset.
The fourteenth is market-day at Zhongzhai and scores of merchants going there from town to buy goods keep the ferry busier than usual.
Her grandfather has been kept on the go all day.
As evening draws in the birds return to their nests.
Only the nightingale sings on and on.
Heat vapour is rising from the rocks and soil, the grass and trees which have baked in the sun all day.
The air is redolent of mud, plants and insects.
As Emerald watches the red clouds in the sky and listens to the murmur of voices from the ferry, a faint sense of desolation creeps over her.
Dusk is as tender, lovely and tranquil as ever.
But anyone brooding over the evening scene is bound to have a faint sense of desolation.
Then the day appears in a melancholy light.
The girl growing to womanhood is conscious of something missing in her life.
Soon another day will be gone beyond recall.
Life is unbearably dull.
She starts to dream.
"If I could take a boat to Taoyuan and see Lake Dongting!
Grandad would search the town for me, beating a gong and shouting my name, carrying a torch to find me."
It would seem from this fantasy that she bears the old man a grudge, for she imagines him lying helplessly down in his boat when the search proves in vain.
Someone shouts, "Hey, ferryman!
What's the matter?
Ferry me over!"
"What's the matter?
My Emerald's run away to Taoyuan!"
"What are you going to do about it?"
"I'm taking the next boat down to kill her with a chopper!"
Emerald shivers as if this were true and runs down to the stream calling her grandfather.
He has just pulled the barge into midstream.
The passengers are talking cheerfully.
Still the girl's heart is going pit-a?pat.
"Come back for me, grandad!"
Thinking she wants to give him a rest, he calls:
"Wait a bit, lass.
I'll be back."
"Aren't you coming?"
"Presently."
She sits on the bank and stares moodily at the stream in the evening light.
One of the passengers strikes a flint, then raps his pipe against the side of the boat.
Emerald bursts into tears.
Her grandfather on his return finds her sitting there disconsolate, unwilling to tell him what the matter is.
He urges her to go home and get supper ready, and she feels a fool to have cried.
So she hurries home, lights the stove in the dark, gloomy room, and goes to the edge of the cliff to call him to supper.
However, the ferryman takes his job too seriously to go back as long as folk are hurrying home to a meal in town.
He ferries each singly, rather than keep one waiting, and shouts to Emerald to stop calling him - he will be home as soon as everyone is across.
Next time Emerald calls him, he pays no attention.
She sits down, very hurt, on the cliff.
In the dark a large glow-worm darts past, its tail flashing blue.
"Let's see how far you fly!"
thinks Emerald, following it with her eyes.
The nightingale's song floats out again.
"Are you never coming, grandad?
I want you!"
The old man hears this plaintive, exasperated cry.
"Coming, lass!"
he calls gruffly.
"Coming!"
Inwardly he wonders: What will she do when I'm gone?
He reaches home to find everything dark except for the glowing stove.
Emerald is hunched up on a stool beside it, her face buried in her hands.
Going closer, he sees she has been crying.
Generally after a heavy day on the ferry, his hands sore, his back aching, he smells cooking as soon as he enters the house and finds Emerald flying round in the lamplight getting supper.
Not so today, however.
"This won't do, lass!"
he says.
"Crying because I'm late!
What if I died?"
There is no answer.
"Don't cry!
You're not a child now.
Chatong girls must have grit."
She uncovers her eyes at that and nestles against him.
"I'm not crying now."
At supper he tells her stories to cheer her up and speaks of her dead mother.
After they have eaten by the bean-oil lamp, the tired old man drinks half a bowl of white rice wine which puts him in such high spirits that he takes Emerald out to the cliff to tell her more stories in the moonlight.
He describes her headstrong mother's clever ways and Emerald listens spellbound.
Hugging her knees in the moonlight, she questions him about her unhappy mother.
Once she sighs, as if a load were on her mind and she hopes sighing will relieve it - not that it does.
Silver moonlight lies everywhere, turning the bamboo forests on the hills black.
The chirring of insects in the undergrowth is steady as a downpour of rain.
An oriole gives a few trills before realizing it is too late for such a commotion.
Closing its little eyes, it settles back to sleep.
The old man is talking with gusto now about the serenading for which twenty years ago this whole border region was known.
Emerald's father was the best singer in these parts, with a fine gift of words to conjure up love or hate.
And her mother loved singing.
Before she ever set eyes on Emerald's father she was answering his songs - the one felling bamboos up in the hills, the other down at the stream ferrying the boat.
"And then what happened?
"asks Emerald.
The ferryman and his granddaughter go to bed, the one tired out from work, the other from weeping.
His stories fresh in her mind, the girl dreams that glorious singing is filling the air, floating from the pagoda and vegetable plot to the ferry, then back to the opposite hillside, to those clumps of saxifrage!
Looking up from the barge earlier that day she has seen that the lush saxifrage is in bloom.
The rock face rises forty feet or more high, so that the flowers are usually out of reach; but now, borne up by a song, she chooses the biggest leaf for an umbrella.
It is just like her grandfather's story.
Half asleep on her mat inside linen bed-curtains, she exults in this wonderful dream.
But her grandfather, lying awake, pricks up his ears to listen to the singing that continues half the night on the opposite cliff.
He knows who the singer is.
So Number One is trying out the knight's way!
Troubled yet pleased, he listens.
Emerald is sleeping so soundly after her tears that he has not the heart to disturb her.
They are up at dawn the next day.
Emerald washes her face in stream water to remove the taboo on repeating dreams, then loses no time in telling her grandfather:
"Grandad, after what you said about serenades, I dreamed I heard such lovely, haunting singing!
I floated everywhere with the sound, and flew half-way up that cliff to pick saxifrage - I just can't remember who I gave it to!
Talk about sweet sleep and pleasant dreams!"
He smiles gently without enlightening her.
"If only you could dream all your life!"
he is thinking.
"Some men dream they're prime minister or have come first in the palace examination."
Sure that the singer is Tianbao, the ferryman asks Emerald to mind the boat while he takes some herbal remedies into town - an excuse to see how the land lies.
Finding Tianbao on the waterfront, he grabs hold of him cheerfully.
"You rascal, Number One!
Playing castle and knight at the same time, eh?"
He is wide of the mark, however.
Both brothers went to Green Stream, but because the elder had the start in sending a go-between he insisted on the younger singing first.
And after Number Two sang, Number One knew he was outmatched and kept quiet.
All the songs Emerald and her grandfather heard had been sung by Number Two.
Number One, accompanying his brother home, decided to leave Chatong on the new oil boat to forget it all.
He is on his way now to see the vessel loaded.
Surprised by his glum expression, the ferryman raises his eyebrows quizzically to indicate that he is not taken in and he brings good news.
He pats the young man on the back and whispers:
"You sang fine!
Someone heard you in her dreams and was quite carried away.
You're the best singer in these parts!"
Looking at the old man's weather-beaten impish face, Number One mutters:
"Stow it!
You'd better give your precious girl to a song-bird."
More bewildered still, the ferryman follows the young man past one of the houses on stilts down to the river.
The new junk is being loaded with oil vats stacked on the bank.
One boatman is plaiting straw ropes to make a shelter against spray on the bulwarks.
Another sitting on a stone nearby is busily greasing paddles.
Asked when the boat is due to leave and who is in charge, this fellow indicates Number One.
The ferryman rubs his hands and says:
"Let me give you a tip, Number One!
The castle's way isn't getting you anywhere.
The knight's way will."
Tianbao points to a window.
"Look over there, uncle.
If you want a songster for your granddaughter, there he is."
The old man's eyes turn to the window where Number Two is mending a fishing-net.
When he gets back to the ferry, Emerald asks:
"Did you quarrel with someone, grandad?
You do look cross."
He laughs, but says not a word of what has happened.
So Number One sails downstream with his cargo of oil, leaving Number Two at home.
The ferryman thinks, since Number Two was the singer, they will hear more of his songs in the next few days.
When evening falls he encourages Emerald to listen for songs that night.
After supper they sit indoors.
Because their hut stands above a stream, it is filled with the droning of mosquitoes at dusk, and Emerald waves a lighted coil of artemisia in every corner to drive the mosquitoes away.
When the room is full of smoke, she puts her coil down at the foot of the bed and sits on a stool to listen to her grandfather.
By degrees he steers the conversation around to singing.
And finally he asks jokingly:
"Emerald, the singing in your dreams carried you up the cliff to pick saxifrage.
Suppose a young fellow really sang to you from the cliff, what would you do?"
She answers, jokingly, "I'd listen for as long as he chose to sing!"
"Three years and six months?"
"Why not, if he sang well?"
"That's not very fair."
"Why not?
Anyone singing for me would want me to listen."
"There's a saying: Food's meant to be eaten and songs to be listened to.
But a young fellow serenading you would want you to understand the drift of his songs."
"What would that be?"
"That he wanted you to be his sweetheart, of course!
If you didn't understand that, you might as well listen to bird-song."
"And suppose I did understand?"
The ferryman slaps his thigh and laughs.
"You're a smart girl, Emerald.
I'm a foolish old man.
You mustn't mind me.
Just let me tell you a joke.
Tianbao from the waterfront took the castle's way and sent a go-between over.
I told you and you didn't seem too pleased, right?
But suppose he had a brother who decided to take the knight's road and sing his way into your heart &#8212; what would you say?"
Emerald starts and lowers her head, not sure how far this is a joke.
"Which of the two would you choose?"
asked her grandfather.
She tries to smile as she begs him:
"Don't joke like that, grandad!"
She stands up.
"Suppose I was telling the truth?"
"How can you..." She slips out of the room.
"It was a joke!"
he calls after her.
"Don't fly out!"
She would not dream of flying out at him, but standing in the doorway she changes the subject.
"There's a full moon tonight!"
She walks into the soft light.
Presently the old man joins her.
She sits down on a boulder still warm from the heat of the sun.
"Don't sit on that hot rock, lass," he says.
"That's the way to get boils."
But after patting the rock, he sits down himself.
In the tender moonlight a fine white mist is floating above the water.
A perfect time for two lovers to sing to each other across the stream.
Emerald is thinking over her grandfather's joke.
She is no fool and he made his meaning clear.
One brother means to take the knight's road and serenade her.
She sits silent and expectant.
Sitting there in the moonlight she longs to be serenaded.
But the time slips by with no sound from the other hill except the shrill chorus of insects.
Emerald goes in to fetch her flute to play in the moonlight.
Not satisfied with her performance, she hands the flute over to her grandfather.
Holding it sideways, he plays on and on till Emerald's heart is melted.
Sitting close beside him, she asks:
"Who invented the flute, grandad?"
"Someone very happy, you may be sure, to make so many other folk happy.
Someone very sad, too, who can make other folk sad! "
"Are you sad, grandad?
Angry with me?"
"That I'm not.
With you beside me, I'm happy."
"Suppose I ran away?"
"You wouldn't leave your old grandad."
"Just suppose I did.
What would you do?"
"I'd set off in my boat to look for you."
Emerald giggles.
"Phoenix and Caltrop Rapids aren't the worst;
No, it's the Whirling Hen Coop that's accursed;
And Whirling Hen Coop's easily passed by;
Black Billows, though, leaps up to meet the sky.
Could your boat shoot all those rapids, grandad?
Didn't you tell me the water there whirls as if it had gone crazy?"
"I'd be so crazy by then, Emerald, no high water or huge waves could frighten me."
Emerald thinks seriously and says, "Well, I promise not to go, but what about you?
What if someone carried you off?"
The old man says nothing.
He has kept the law and is not afraid of officials, but there is no way to stop death from carrying him off.
He stares unwinking at a star on the south horizon, and thinks about his death.
"In the seventh and eighth months there are shooting stars &#8212; is that when I'm going to die?"
He recalls his conversation on the front with Number One, the girl with a mill as dowry and Number Two.
Old memories trouble him.
"Grandad!"
says Emerald suddenly.
"Sing to me!"
The ferryman sings ten songs, and the girl beside him listens with closed eyes.
When he falls silent, she murmurs, "I picked another bunch of saxifrage."
He has sung the songs that she heard in her dreams.
Although in possession of the field, Number Two does not go back to Green Stream to sing.
The fifteenth and sixteenth come and go, and by the twenty-sixth the ferryman can contain himself no longer but goes into town to find the young man.
At the city gate, on his way to the waterfront, he runs into Number One's go-between, Yang the Groom, leading a horse out of town.
"I'm glad you've come, uncle," says Yang.
"I've something to tell you."
"What's that?"
"It's this: Tianbao's boat got fouled up at Caltrop Rapids.
He fell into the whirlpool there and was drowned.
Shun Shun's family only heard the news this morning.
Number Two set off at once."
The ferryman, stunned, can hardly believe his ears.
"Tianbao drowned?"
he repeats incredulously.
"Ever hear of a duck being drowned?"
"Duck or no duck, that's what happened... You showed uncommon foresight, not letting him have your granddaughter."
Incredible as the news sounds, Yang's expression bears it out.
The old man says bleakly:
"Foresight?
It was Heaven's will!
We're all in the hands of Heaven..." His heart is brimming over.
Leaving Yang, he hurries to the waterfront in search of confirmation.
Paper money is being burned at Shun Shun's door, where a group of gossips have gathered.
He walks over - they are canvassing the same news.
As soon as they notice the ferryman, however, they start discussing the price of oil downstream.
Sick at heart, he decides to look for some friendly boatman.
It is then that Shun Shun comes down the street.
The bluff, middle-aged man, nearly prostrate with grief, is making a brave effort to keep going.
When he sees the ferryman he says:
"That scheme of ours has come to nothing, uncle.
Tianbao's done for.
Had you heard?"
The ferryman's eyes are red, he wrings his hands.
"Is it true, then?
Surely not!
When did it happen?"
The man who has hurried back with the news puts in, "Noon of the sixteenth.
Our junk ran on to the rocks and started shipping water.
Trying to punt clear, Number One got thrown overboard."
"You saw him fall in?"
"I fell in at the same time!"
"What did he say?"
"He'd no time to say anything!
He'd said nothing all the trip!"
The ferryman shakes his head and darts an uneasy glance at Shun Shun.
As if understanding what is troubling him, the wharf-master says,"It's fate, uncle.
Don't take it to heart.
I've some good wine here from Daxingchang.
You must take some."
One of his men fills a bamboo container with wine, covers it with a fresh tung leaf and hands it to the old man.
With lowered head he carries the wine towards the wharf, to the place where Tianbao embarked.
Yang is down there sitting in the shade of a willow while his horse rolls in the sand.
The ferryman plods over and offers him a drink.
Sipping the wine, which puts fresh heart into them, the old man describes how the two brothers went to Green Stream on the night of the fourteenth to sing.
"You think Emerald wants Number Two, uncle?"
asks Yang.
"Number Two can have her?..."
That same moment Nuosong himself comes down from the front, equipped as if for a long journey.
At the sight of the ferryman he turns to make off.
"Number Two!"
shouts Yang.
"Come here!
I've something to tell you!"
Number Two stops reluctantly.
"Come on!"
calls Yang with a glance at the ferryman.
"What is it?"
"I heard you'd left.
Sit down.
I'm not going to eat you!
When are you going?"
Sun-burned, broad-shouldered and lithe as a tiger, Nuosong sits down with a constrained smile under the willow.
The ferryman, wanting to break the silence, points to the new mill in the distance upstream and says,"Number Two, I hear that mill's to be yours one day!
If it is, can I mind it for you?"
Number Two dislikes being sounded out in this way and he says nothing.
To ease the tension, Yang asks,"Well, Number Two, are you ready to set off?"
The young man nods in silence and walks away.
Cold-shouldered by the young man, the ferryman trudges back unhappily to Green Stream.
At the ferry he tells Emerald casually:
"There's news in town today, lass.
Tianbao went down to Chenzhou with an oil boat; but luck was against him.
He fell into Caltrop Rapids and was drowned."
Emerald does not take this in and pays no attention.
"It's true, Emerald," he insists.
"Yang, the go-between who was here, said I'd shown uncommon foresight in not letting him marry you."
She shoots a quick glance at him.
His eyes are red and she knows he has been drinking, but he seems put out and she wonders who has crossed him.
When the boat reaches their side, he walks home, an unnatural smile on his face.
Emerald, minding the boat, hears not a sound from him.
When she finally goes back he is sitting on the doorstep plaiting straw sandals.
His manner is so strange that she kneels by him and asks:
"What's the matter, grandad?"
"I tell you, Tianbao's dead!
And Number Two holds it against us - he thinks we're to blame!"
The old man looks so black, smiles so rarely, and pays so little attention to Emerald that she wonders if he has stopped loving her.
She doesn't know the real reason.
This lasts no more than a couple of days, however.
Then they go on ferrying the boat together just as before, except that something invisible, irreplaceable, seems to have gone out of their life.
The ferryman still receives a kindly welcome whenever he calls on Shun Shun, although it is plain that the wharf-master remembers the reason for his son's death.
Number Two has gone six hundred li away to Chenzhou, trying in vain to find his brother's remains.
After posting up notices at every Customs House, he comes back to Chatong.
Before long he sets off on another trip to eastern Sichuan and sees the ferryman when he comes to Green Stream.
Nuosong behaves as if all the past were forgotten.
"Well, Number Two, it's broiling hot in the sixth month," says the old man.
"Aren't you afraid of wearing yourself out with these trips?"
"We've got to eat.
I must go even if there's a ball of fire overhead."
"Got to eat!
Your family has plenty to eat."
"Maybe, but my dad doesn't like young people to idle about at home."
"Is your dad well?"
"Well enough.
He's eating and working as usual."
"Your brother's death has taken it out of him."
Number Two says nothing, staring at the white pagoda behind the ferryman's hut.
The thought of that last night together is making his heart ache.
The ferryman eyes him covertly and a smile spreads over his face.
"Number Two, my Emerald had a dream one night in the fifth month..." He darts another glance at the young man who seems neither startled nor angry, and so he goes on,"It was a strange dream.
She floated up on somebody's song to pick the saxifrage on that cliff over there."
Number Two looks away, an embarrassed smile on his lips, thinking the old man must be making this up.
The ferryman guesses his thoughts and asks, "Don't you believe me?"
"Why shouldn't I?
A fine fool I was, singing all night on that cliff."
Taken aback by this frankness, the old man mumbles, "You did...
It's true, then..."
"Of course it's true.
As true as that Tianbao's dead."
"Well, but..."
The old man, hoping to clear matters up, has gone the wrong way about it and made things worse.
He wants to explain in full, but here they are at the bank.
Number Two jumps ashore to go on.
The old man calls desperately after him:
"Wait a bit, Number Two!
Listen to me!
You didn't make a fool of yourself that night, but your songs have turned someone's head!"
Nuosong has halted, but he retorts, "Forget it!
Don't say any more!"
"Number Two, I heard you'd rather have this boat of mine than the mill.
Old Yang told me.
Do you mean it?"
"Suppose I do?"
The ferryman takes heart again and suddenly shouts to Emerald to come down.
But as ill luck will have it, she is out.
They get neither sight nor sound of her.
Number Two waits for a while, watching the old man.
Then without a word, smiling to himself, he strides off with a porter carrying a big load of bean-vermicelli and white sugar.
Once over the hill beyond Green Stream, they swing along skirting the bamboo forest.
The porter says:
"Number Two, that old fellow's taken a fancy to you, all right!"
When the young man makes no response, the other goes on:
"He asked which you'd rather have: the mill or his boat.
Are you really going to marry his granddaughter and take over his job?"
Number Two only laughs.
The porter says:
"If it was up to me, I'd choose the mill.
It'll give you seven pints of rice and three pecks of bran a day."
Number Two says, "When we get back I'll ask my dad to go as your go-between to Zhongzhai to get that mill for you.
For me the ferry-boat is good enough.
That old fellow's too roundabout, though.
If not for him, Number One would still be alive."
The ferryman is disappointed when Number Two leaves before his granddaughter's return.
He goes home but cannot find her.
She comes back presently with a basket of bamboo shoots picked behind the hill.
"I called you, Emerald, but you didn't hear!"
"What did you want me for?"
"Someone crossed on my boat...
Someone you know.
We got to talking of you...
But when I called, you didn't answer."
"Who was it?"
"You guess, lass.
Not a stranger - someone you know."
Emerald thinks of the brief conversation she has overheard in the forest.
She flushes and says nothing.
"Did you get many bamboo shoots?"
asks the old man.
She empties her basket on to the floor.
There are only a dozen or so bamboo shoots and a big bunch of saxifrage.
Under her grandfather's quizzical glance, she blushes and leaves the room.
Another month slips quietly by and aching hearts seem to heal in the long summer days.
The heat leaves no time for anything but sweating and making cool drinks: there seems to be no place for love in men's lives.
Emerald has her siesta every day in the shade of the pagoda.
Being high up, it is cool there, and the birds in the bamboo forest sing her to sleep till she floats with their songs into dreams, fantastic dreams.
Nothing wrong about that.
Poets write reams of verse about one little thing; sculptors carve figures that seem alive on the rock; painters use their reds, greens and greys to paint glorious pictures &#8212; why should they do this if not hoping for the reward of a smile or an answering frown?
Emerald, lacking their means of expression, gives rein to her fancy.
Her secret frightens and excites her too.
The future is still uncertain, but the turmoil of her emotions cannot be kept hidden altogether from her grandfather.
In a sense the old man understands.
But then, again, he understands nothing.
That Emerald does not dislike Number Two he knows, but not how the young man feels.
Although cold-shouldered by both the lad and his father, he does not give up hope.
"We must fix things up right, not tempt fate."
Thinking thus, he feels that the road to love is rough indeed and, open-eyed, dreams more fantastic dreams than any Emerald has.
He asks news from every passer-by of Shun Shun and his son, as if they belonged to one family.
But, strange to say, he dreads meeting them.
For that makes him tongue-tied and awkward, unable to do anything but clench and unclench his fists.
Shun Shun and his son are well aware of this but the bitter memory of the one now gone remains in their hearts and makes them go about their business as if ignorant of the whole matter.
Even after a dreamless sleep, the old man says to Emerald the next morning:
"I had a fearful dream last night!"
"What was it, grandad?"
As if reconstructing the dream, his eyes on her small face and long lashes, he describes one of his rosy daydreams to her.
Needless to say, these are not fearful at all.
Every river finds its way at last to the sea.
Starting with something far removed, he always ends up in such a way that Emerald blushes and lowers her head.
If she starts sulking or looks upset, he pretends to take fright and excuses himself, saying:
"I don't mean that, Emerald, mind you!
I'm an old fool, I just ramble on."
Sometimes, though, these foolish ramblings of his make her smile.
One day she blurts out:
"How can you go on like that, grandad?"
Before he can counter, "I've so much on my mind," someone shouts from the ferry.
In that heat, passers-by carrying loads weighing seventy catties like to linger in the cool by the stream, squatting down by the rock to drink cold tea from his pitcher as they pass round their pipes and chat with the ferryman.
And so he hears the gossip from all around.
They may sit there for quite a time, washing their feet or bathing in the cool stream, and then the talk ranges even further.
The old man passes on some of it to Emerald, who learns quite a little this way about rises and falls in prices, the cost of travelling by sedan-chair or boat, how timber is floated down the rapids, how the recruiting officers go to work, how opium is prepared on opium-boats by women with unbound feet... all this and much more.
When Number Two comes back from eastern Sichuan it is nearly dusk, with hardly a ripple on the stream.
The ferryman and Emerald are looking over their turnip seedlings.
After a long sleep that noon Emerald feels rather restless, so as soon as she hears a shout she runs down to the bank.
Two men with their backs to her on the wharf stand out clearly in the evening sun &#8212; Nuosong and his hired man!
She turns and darts into the forest like some small wild animal that sees a hunter.
The two men, hearing her steps, look round just in time to see her disappear.
When no one comes, the hired man shouts again.
The ferryman hears him but goes on squatting by his seedlings, smiling to himself.
He has seen Emerald turn and guesses she is avoiding someone she knows.
When she does not go down, the hired man shouts again.
After he has shouted several times, he says, "What's up, do you suppose, Number Two?
Can the old fellow be ill, leaving Emerald to manage?
""Wait a bit.
Don't be so impatient," says Number Two.
So they wait a little longer.
Their quietness makes the old man wonder, "Can it be Number Two?"
He stays where he is so as not to scare Emerald away.
Presently a different voice rings out.
This time it is Number Two and he sounds annoyed.
Is he getting impatient?
Have they quarrelled?
The old man hurries down to the bank, quite flustered.
He finds them already on board.
"Well, Number Two!"
he cries.
"You're back again!"
The young man looks far from pleased.
"That's right &#8212; what's happening here?
How long do you expect us to wait?"
"I thought &#8212; " The old man looks round.
There is no sign of Emerald, but catching sight of Brownie running out of the forest he knows she is on the hill.
"I thought you'd crossed."
"Crossed?
How could we cross without you?"
As the hired man speaks a waterfowl flies past.
"The birds are going to roost.
We must hurry home for supper."
"It's not late.
You'll be back in time."
The ferryman jumps aboard, thinking, "Didn't he want to take over this boat of mine?"
He hauls the barge into midstream.
"Must have had a rough trip, Number Two!"
The young man listens moodily to his remarks.
When they reach the bank, he and his man shoulder their loads and make off without a word.
Their coolness is not lost on the ferryman, who shakes his fist after them, swearing under his breath as he hauls the ferry back.
Emerald's flight and her grandfather's long delay make Number Two suspect that his chances are slim.
True, the ferryman keeps hinting that all will be well, but his cryptic utterances are not too reassuring.
And, remembering his brother, Nuosong misunderstands the old man's efforts.
He goes home resentful and exasperated.
Three days later, a man from Zhongzhai comes to sound them out.
He calls on Shun Shun and asks his son's intentions: Does he want the new mill or not?
The wharf-master puts the question to Number Two, who says:
"If it's to please you, dad, and getting hold of this mill and a daughter-in?law from Zhongzhai would make you happy - go ahead and accept.
If it's to please me, this needs some thinking over - I'll let you know in a few days.
I still haven't made up my mind whether it's a mill I want or a boat.
Maybe I'm fated to be a ferryman!"
The middleman, returning with this message past Green Stream, cannot resist chuckling at sight of the ferryman when he recalls Number Two's answer.
The old man knows he comes from Zhongzhai and asks what business has taken him to town.
"Nothing special.
I just dropped in to see the wharf-master."
"You wouldn't have made the trip without some reason."
"Well, we did talk something over."
"What was that?"
Since the other says nothing, the old man goes on, "I hear your master's thinking of giving that mill by the river and his daughter to Shun Shun.
Will they make a match of it?"
"It's all fixed up."
The man from Zhongzhai grins.
"Shun Shun is for it and when he asked his son..."
"What did his son say?"
"He said,'I've a choice between a mill and a boat.
First I wanted the boat, now I've settled on the mill.'
After all, a boat's a more chancy thing than a mill!
He's got his head screwed on the right way, that lad..."
This man is a rice-dealer, a smooth customer, who knows very well - though he pretends not to - what the "boat" in this case means.
When the ferryman makes as if to speak, he goes on:
"Well, it's all a question of fate.
Men's hands are tied.
Too bad about Shun Shun's eldest, a fine youngster like that getting drowned!"
This thrust hits the ferryman hard and makes him bite back the question on the tip of his tongue.
Then the other continues on his way, leaving the old man standing dismayed on his boat.
His spirits sink even lower at the thought of Number Two's cold manner that day when he crossed the ferry.
Emerald has been amusing herself up by the pagoda.
Now she runs to the rock above the stream to ask her grandfather to sing.
When he pays no attention, she hurries petulantly down to the water's edge and finds him in the dumps for some unknown reason.
At sight of her radiant, sun-burned face he gives a sheepish smile.
A porter is waiting on the other bank, and the old man casts off without a word to Emerald, though in midstream he starts singing loudly.
Once he has ferried the porter across he steps ashore and comes up to her, still smiling sheepishly, one hand to his forehead.
"Are you running a fever, grandad?"
she asks.
"Lie down and rest in the shade.
I'll see to the boat."
"You'll see to the boat?
Fair enough, that's to be your job."
He does feel rather feverish, with a constriction at heart.
Though he pretends nothing is wrong, he goes home to gash himself with a crock and let out some blood before lying down to sleep.
Emerald in charge of the boat is strangely happy.
"If grandad won't sing, I'll sing for myself," she decides.
Lying with closed eyes, the old man hears her singing.
His heart pains him but he tells himself this is not a serious illness: he will be better tomorrow.
He must go to the waterfront, there is so much to see to...
Though he gets up the next day, his head is still heavy.
Emerald, rising to the occasion, prepares a cooling concoction and makes him take it, after which she picks some garlic behind the house to boil with congee for him.
Between trips on the boat she runs home to see how he is.
He says nothing, but his secret preys on his mind.
Three days in bed restore him enough to walk about a little; and although his bones still ache he decides to go into town.
Emerald, who is still in the dark, begs him not to go.
He clenches and unclenches his hands, wondering whether to tell her the reason.
At sight of her sunburned oval face and clear bright eyes, he sighs.
"I've urgent business, lass," he says.
"I must go."
"What urgent business?"
She pouts.
He knows her temper and sees she is upset, so instead of insisting he puts away the bamboo container and embroidered wallet he has got out to take.
"All right, I won't go!"
he concedes.
"Not if you're afraid I'll fall down and kill myself!
I just wanted to go while it's still cool to clear some matters up...
But tomorrow will do."
"Yes, go tomorrow, grandad," she agrees gently.
"Your legs are still shaky.
Have a good rest today!"
With an indignant gesture he starts out, nearly stumbling over his stick for plaiting straw sandals at the door.
As he recovers his balance, she teases:"What did I say?
Always so sure you know best!"
He picks up the stick and throws it into a corner.
"Think I'm an old crock, do you?
Wait a few days and I'll kill a panther to show you!"
That afternoon it rains, but the old man talks Emerald into letting him go.
Unable to go with him, she makes him take Brownie.
In town he meets an old friend who keeps him talking about the price of salt and rice and takes him to the customs office to inspect the new horse just bought by the head of the revenue bureau.
After that he goes to the waterfront to see Shun Shun.
He finds him playing cards with three other men and, unable to get a word with him in private, just stands there watching.
Shun Shun offers him wine but he declines - saying his stomach is still upset.
The game drags on and there he stays, while Shun Shun gives all his attention to his cards.
It is someone else who notices his tense expression and asks if he has business.
Nervously clenching and unclenching his hands, he admits he would like a word with the wharf-master.
Shun Shun, understanding at last why he has stood watching so long, looks up with a smile.
"Why didn't you say so?
I thought you were impressed by my game!"
"I just wanted a word...
Didn't like to interrupt you..."
Shun Shun cheerfully throws down his cards and leads the way into an inner room.
"Well, what is it?"
The pity in his voice indicates that he guesses what is coming.
"A man from Zhongzhai told me you're planning to marry your son to Captain Wang's daughter - is that true?"
The ferryman's eyes are fixed on Shun Shun's face as if willing him to give the answer he wants.
The wharf-master says, "That's right."
His tone implies, "Is it any business of yours?"
"It's true then?"
"Yes."
The offhand answer implies again, "What has this to do with you?"
Trying to hide his dismay, the ferryman asks, "What about Number Two?"
"He left on a junk some days ago for Taoyuan."
Number Two, in fact, has fallen out with his father before setting off on this trip.
Broad-minded Shun Shun may be, but he does not want the girl who caused Tianbao's death to marry his second son.
That is only natural.
The custom in these parts is for young people to settle such questions themselves - grown-ups have no say.
Normally, if Number Two and Emerald were in love, Shun Shun would raise no objection to their marriage.
Somehow or other the ferryman's deep concern over the matter has given both Shun Shun and his son the wrong idea about him.
The wharf-master holds the officious old man to blame for the recent tragedy in his house.
His friendly manner conceals underlying resentment.
Not giving him a chance to go on, Shun Shun says bluntly:
"Forget it, uncle!
Save your mouth to drink wine, not to sing for the young folk!
I understand you; you mean well.
You've got to understand me too.
We should stick to what concerns us, not meddle with our children's affairs."
This takes the wind out of the ferryman's sails and before he has a chance to reply the wharf-master leads him back to the card-table.
The old man has nothing to say.
Shun Shun is still laughing and joking, but the way he flings down his cards shows that he is annoyed.
Without a word the ferryman puts on his conical hat and leaves the house.
It is still early and the dejected old man goes to town to see Yang the groom.
He finds him drinking and, though he pleads sickness, Yang forces him to down a few cups.
He is sweating by the time he reaches Green Stream, where he douses himself with cold water.
Tired out, he asks Emerald to mind the boat while he goes home to sleep.
It is a close, stifling evening.
Red dragon-flies are skimming low over the water.
Clouds gather in the sky and a sultry wind makes the bamboos creak and groan.
A storm is brewing.
Emerald frets on the boat as she watches the dragon-flies, and, worried about her grandfather, runs home.
He is not asleep as she expected, but sitting on the doorstep making sandals.
"Grandad!
How many sandals do you need?
There are still fourteen pairs by your bed.
Why don't you rest?"
He struggles to his feet and stares up at the sky, then mutters under his breath, "There's going to be a big thunderstorm this evening!
Mind you moor the boat under the rock - it's going to pour!"
"I'm scared, grandad!"
she says.
But it is not thunder or lightning that frightens the girl.
As if aware of this, the ferryman answers, "What's there to be scared of?
What must be, must be.
Don't be afraid!"
That night, sure enough, rain pours down and thunder crashes.
A flash of lightning just behind the hut is followed by a tremendous roll of thunder.
Emerald shivers in the dark and her grandfather wakes.
Knowing she is scared and afraid she may catch cold, he gets up to cover her.
"Don't be scared of lightning, Emerald!"
"I'm not!"
she tells him, thinking, "Not with you here!"
After the next thunder-clap a fearful crash blots out the swish of the rain.
It sounds like a landslide.
They wonder if the cliff has collapsed, burying their boat beneath it!
They lie there in silence, the old man and the girl, listening to the downpour and thunder.
Before long, in spite of the storm, Emerald falls asleep.
When she wakes it is light and the rain has stopped, but runlets are racing down the hills into the stream.
Her grandfather still seems fast asleep, so she gets up quietly and tiptoes out.
Then path in front of their door has become a canal down which muddy water from behind the pagoda is rushing to cascade over the cliff.
Everywhere channels have appeared overnight.
The vegetable plot is flooded, the seedlings smothered in gravel.
Walking forward she sees that the swollen stream has submerged the wharf and is lapping round their pitcher.
The path down to the wharf is transformed into a gurgling yellow brook.
The hawser is under water.
The barge she left under the cliff has disappeared.
For the moment this does not worry her, for the cliff has not caved in after all.
But as she looks this way and that for the boat, a gasp escapes her - the white pagoda behind their hut has gone!
She races back there.
Yes, the pagoda has crumbled into a mountainous clutter of rubble and bricks.
She screams in terror for her grandfather.
When he makes no answer, she dashes inside to shake him frantically.
Still he utters not a sound.
His life has guttered out as the storm died down.
Emerald is shaken with sobs.
Before long a runner on official business reaches the far side of the stream and shouts for the ferry.
Emerald is crying by the stove as she heats water to wash her grandfather's body.
The man loses patience and throws pebbles at the hut, thinking the ferryman must be asleep.
Her face wet with tears, Emerald hurries to the cliff.
"Get a move on, there!
Where's the boat?"
"It's broken its moorings."
"Where's your grandfather?
Why isn't he on the job?"
"Fifty years he stayed on the job - now he's dead!"
Emerald breaks down again.
The man realizes he will have to go back to report this.
"Is he truly dead?"
he exclaims.
"Don't cry!
I'll go back and get them to send a boat with all you'll need."
Back in town he spreads the news, and soon everybody around Chatong knows of it.
The wharf-master sends for an empty boat to take a plain wood coffin to Green Stream.
Yang and another old soldier hurry to the hills by the stream to cut a few dozen big bamboos and lash them together as a make-shift ferry.
When this raft is ready, they punt it across and Yang, leaving the old soldier in charge of the ferry, goes up to see his dead friend.
His eyes brimming, he lays gentle hands on those rigid limbs and does what has to be done.
Other helpers arrive, and the boat with the coffin is rowed round from the river.
The old Taoist from town has brought his stock-in?trade, an old linen gown and a large rooster with which to carry out the due rites by the coffin, chanting masses and calling back the dead man's spirit.
He crosses by the raft too.
People come and go while Emerald, huddled on a low stool by the stove, sobs to herself.
Noon brings Shun Shun, accompanied by a man carrying a sack of rice, a vat of wine and a large leg of pork.
He tells the girl:
"Emerald, I have heard of your grandad's death - death is the lot of us all.
After a long, hard life he deserves a rest.
You've no call to worry, I'll look after you!"
After seeing that all is in order, he goes away.
That afternoon, when the body has been laid in the coffin, all the helpers leave except the priest, Yang the groom and two young hired men sent by the wharf-master.
Before dusk falls, the Taoist makes some red and green paper flowers and moulds a few candlesticks out of clay.
When it grows dark he lights a big yellow candle on the table in front of the coffin, burns incense and sets small candles all round.
In his blue linen gown, a small paper banner in his hand, he slowly starts to circle the silent coffin, followed by Emerald with Yang bringing up the rear.
The two hired hands stand by the stove, keeping up an irregular din on their gong and clappers.
The Taoist, walking with closed eyes, intones incantations to comfort the dead man's spirit.
When he chants of the spirit's arrival in the Western Paradise where flowers bloom in every season, Yang raises high the wooden dish in his hands and scatters the paper flowers over the coffin.
The ceremony ends with fire-crackers at midnight, by which time the candles have nearly burned out.
Her eyes still streaming, Emerald makes haste to light the stove and prepare a meal for the men.
After eating, the Taoist curls up on the dead man's bed to sleep.
The others must keep watch by the coffin.
To liven the proceedings, Yang drums on the bottom of an empty rice measure and sings two songs from the Twenty-four Acts of Filial Piety - "Wang Xiang Lies on Ice" and "Huang Xiang Fans the Pillow".
A whole day of weeping and a whole day of commotion have tired Emerald out.
She leans her head on the coffin and dozes off.
Yang and the two hired hands are in high spirits after the meal and a few cups of wine, so they take it in turn to sing.
Soon Emerald wakes, wondering if it is all a dream; but no, there is the coffin - her grandfather is dead.
Her tears brim over again.
"Don't cry, Emerald!
Tears won't bring him back to life."
Yang tells a ribald joke about the tears of a bride, which throws the two hired hands into fits of laughter.
Brownie barks outside and Emerald opens the door.
She stands in front of the hut for a while, listening to the insects all around.
The moon is bright, the clear blue sky is inlaid with brilliant stars.
It is all unbelievably quiet and lovely.
She wonders:
"Can it be true?
Is grandad really dead?"
To be on the safe side, Yang follows her.
He knows girls may look calm when a fire is smouldering inside them.
Now her grandfather is dead and all her hopes dashed, she may jump over the cliff to join the old man.
For this reason he has been keeping an eye on her.
She is still standing there as if in a trance when by and by he coughs.
"Dew's falling, lass.
Aren't you chilly?"
"No."
"It's a beautiful night."
"Oh!..."
She exclaims at a shooting star.
To the south falls another shooting star.
An owl on the further hill hoots.
"Emerald!"
Standing beside her now, he urges her gently, "Go in and have a sleep.
Don't do anything rash.
It's a release for an old man to die.
Don't make him worry about you!"
She goes quietly back to her grandfather's coffin and sinks down on the ground to sob again.
The two hired hands are asleep.
Yang coaxes her in a low voice,"Now then, don't cry!
Don't make your grandad feel bad.
Crying only makes your eyes swollen and your throat hoarse - what use is that?
I tell you, I know what was on your grandad's mind.
You can count on me: I'll fix things up the way he'd have wished.
I know how to handle this.
I'll get someone both he and you like to take over the boat.
If they don't agree, I'm not too old to swing a scythe and have it out with them!
Don't you worry, Emerald.
Leave it all to me!..."
Somewhere far away a cock crows.
The old Taoist, mutters to himself half asleep, "What, is it light already?
Must be stirring..."
Bright and early the helpers bring ropes and poles out from town.
Six men bear the old ferryman's small, plain wooden coffin to its resting place in the hills behind the ruined pagoda, followed in silence by wharf-master Shun Shun, Yang the groom, Emerald, the old Taoist priest and Brownie.
Upon reaching the square pit dug in readiness, the old Taoist jumps in, as the custom is, to place cinnabar and rice in the four corners and centre.
After burning paper money and chanting a prayer for the dead man's soul, he clambers out and signs to the coffin-bearers to lower their load.
With a strangled cry, Emerald throws herself on the coffin and refuses to rise.
The groom has to tug her away by force.
Soon the coffin is lowered, set four-square, the ropes are hauled off and fresh earth is shovelled into the grave.
Emerald is still sobbing on the ground.
The Taoist, who must preside over a fast in town, has to hurry back to the ferry.
The wharf-master, a busy man, leaves the groom to see to things here while he goes back too.
The helpers, after washing their hands in the stream, scatter on their different business, knowing that hanging round to offer condolences would simply upset the girl more.
This leaves only three people by Green Stream: Emerald, Yang the groom and Bald Chen, given temporary charge of the ferry by the wharf-master.
Brownie dislikes this bald man who once flung a stone at him, and from time to time growls softly as if to say, "What are you doing here?
We don't need you!"
That afternoon Emerald begs the old groom to go into town and get someone else in the barracks to mind his horses so that he can come back and keep her company.
Upon his return he sends Bald Chen away.
Emerald and Brownie go on minding the boat, letting the old groom sit on the cliff and rest or sing to her in his old, raucous voice.
Three days later the wharf-master comes to propose that Emerald move to his house.
Wanting to stay near her grandfather's grave, she refuses.
She asks him to get permission from the yamen for the groom to stay with her for the time being.
Shun Shun agrees and goes off, having made her a present of a few catties of sugar.
Yang the groom is getting on for sixty.
He served in the same company as Emerald's father and can tell better stories than her grandfather; besides which, he is so warm-hearted, spry and handy that she feels she has lost a grandfather only to find a new uncle.
When passengers on the ferry ask about the poor old man, or she thinks of him at dusk, her heart is sad.
But as time goes by the pain subsides.
Every evening the two of them sit on the cliff to talk about the poor old man in the cold, wet ground.
The girl hears much new to her and draws comfort from it.
They talk of her father too, the soldier who longed for love as well as honour, how in his Green Battalion uniform - a green tunic and black silk turban - he was a sight to turn the head of all the village girls.
The groom speaks of Emerald's mother too, the sweet singer she was, and how everybody loved the songs she sang.
Times change and everything with them.
If even the emperor has been dragged off his golden throne, what vicissitudes must be the fate of lesser mortals!
The groom smiles wrily to recall how as a young man he spruced himself up and led his horses to the hills near Green Stream to sing to Emerald's mother; she had no time for him - yet now he has become the sole support and confidant of her daughter!
Every evening the two of them talk of her grandfather and all that concerns her family.They talk of what led up to the old man's death, till Emerald understands much that in his life he kept from her: Number Two's serenading, the death of Number One, the coolness of Shun Shun and his son towards the ferryman, the mill used as a bait to catch Number Two, who with his brother's death on his mind and failing to get any notice from Emerald, yet is so angry at the pressure put on him to take the mill when it is the boat he wants that he goes down river.
So she had much to do with her grandfather's death... All these puzzles are cleared up now.
But the new knowledge makes her cry all night.
Four weeks after the funeral, the wharf-master summons the groom back to town and proposes again that Emerald should move to his house.
The groom says she should be consulted.
And when he finds her still reluctant to leave, he makes a counter-proposal.
Since she has not married into the family, living in a strange man's house would be awkward, she had better stay at Green Stream till Number Two's return.
Who knows?
He may still want to come and mind the ferry!
She agrees to this.
And the old groom, imagining that Number Two will be back any day, leaves his horses in someone else's care while he keeps Emerald company.
So the weeks slip by.
Now the white pagoda at Green Stream is generally believed to have much to do with the favourable influences at work round Chatong.
It is absolutely essential to rebuild it.
Contributions are collected from the garrison headquarters, customs office, different shops and households and the big landlords on the outskirts of Chatong.
In order that the building of the pagoda may not benefit a few individuals only, everyone is given a chance to accumulate merit by subscribing; and so the new ferry-boat carries a bamboo tube with a slot in the middle through which anyone who wishes can put in money.
When it is filled the groom takes it to the authorities in town and brings back another.
Passers-by who see the old ferryman has vanished, while Emerald is wearing a white mourning ribbon in her hair, know the old man, his task done, is lying at rest in the earth as food for the worms.
With sympathetic glances at the girl, they put money into the bamboo tube, murmuring, "Heaven preserve you!
The dead has gone to the Western Paradise.
Peace be with the living!"
Emerald's heart is touched and pained by their pity, and she turns quickly away to pull the boat.
When winter comes a new white pagoda is completed.
But the young man whose serenading in the moonlight made Emerald's heart soar up lightly in her dreams has not come back to Chatong.
He may never come back.
Or he may come back tomorrow.
April 19, 1934