Vikings were seafaring warriors who raided and colonized wide areas of Europe from the ninth to the eleventh centuries, burning, plundering, and killing as they went.
These marauders came from Scandinavia - what is now Denmark, Norway, and Sweden.
The Vikings were made up of landowning chieftains and clan heads, their followers, freemen, and any energetic young clan members who sought adventure and booty overseas.
Some were part-time raiders and pillagers, spending part of the year farming or fishing at home.
Vikings were never a unified group.
Rather, the Viking trait of seeking riches outside their homeland was one shared by many peoples who dwelt in Scandinavia.
The exact ethnic composition of the Viking armies is unknown in particular cases, but the Vikings' expansion in the Baltic lands and in Russia can probably be attributed to the Swedes.
However, the nonmilitary colonization of the Orkney Islands, Faroe Islands, and Iceland was clearly accomplished by the Norwegians.
The Vikings' disruptive influence profoundly affected European history.
Their name was given to the era that dated from about 740 CE to about 1050 - the Viking Age.
During that time, the Scandinavian countries seem to have possessed a practically inexhaustible surplus of manpower.
Leaders of ability, who could organize groups of warriors into conquering bands and armies, were seldom lacking.
These bands would negotiate the seas in their longships and mount hit-and-run raids on cities and towns along the coasts of Europe.
Their burning, plundering, and killing earned them the name vikingr, meaning "pirate" in the early Scandinavian languages.
Their expression for these campaigns of swift, cruel attacks was to "go a-viking."
This tenth-century illustration depicts Vikings leaving their ships to explore their fortunes in England.
The image was created on vellum, which is parchment made from calfskin.
The fierce reputation of the Viking warrior has survived the centuries.
Some attributes are myths, such as their nonexistent horned helmets.
However, some truths are more bizarre than anything that could be fabricated, such as the berserkers, the Viking warriors who put themselves in a trance of rage before battle, biting their shields and howling like animals.
Besides warriors, Vikings were artisans, craftsmen, and traders.
Vikings were some of the earliest pioneers, trekking across the Atlantic Ocean to Iceland, Greenland, and North America.
They traveled throughout Europe and as far east as Central Asia.
They exchanged their goods - such as honey, tin, wheat, wool, wood, iron, fur, walrus ivory, and fish - for silver, silk, spices, glass, jewelry, and more.
Slaves were also a part of the Viking trade.
Much of our understanding of the Vikings comes from accounts from cultures other than the Scandinavians - often cultures that have been raided or conquered.
Some of these biased reports understandably paint Viking warriors as violent, brutal aggressors.
The English cleric and scholar Alcuin the Elder wrote of the Vikings in the late 700s: "Never before has such terror appeared in Britain as we have now suffered from a pagan race."
While formidable, the people known as Vikings were a complex civilization who contributed much to European society, even while spreading terror and chaos.
Through travels and trade, they helped connect distant cultures, spreading goods as well as ideas.
The word "Viking" has come to be the label applied to the people and culture of Scandinavia during the Viking Age, even those who were not marauders.
Vikings more or less looked much like people of today, though perhaps a bit shorter because of poorer nutrition.
Beauty and Fashion
Most cultures have a standard of beauty, and Vikings were no different.
Blonde hair was preferred.
Men and women used strong soap containing lye to bleach their hair, including the men's beards.
Ahmad Ibn Fadlan, a tenth-century Arab traveler, called the Vikings "the filthiest of God's creatures."
But at least wealthier Vikings were known for their cleanliness.
Tweezers, razors, combs, and ear-cleaning tools made from animal bones and antlers have been found at excavation sites.
Viking men wore jackets and pants.
Women wore dresses.
Both wore a long cloak fastened at one or both shoulders over their clothes. (
Cloaks fashioned over one shoulder made it easier to carry and use a weapon.)
Wealthier people wore silver or gold brooches on their cloaks.
Shoes were made of calfor goatskin.
Vikings wore skates or spikes on their feet to cross ice-covered surfaces in winter.
This image shows an artist's imagining of Vikings.
It is an illustration of a story in which they aid an old Irish woman.
Family Time
Women married young, as young as twelve years old, but still held some rights, more rights than in many other cultures.
They could inherit property, request a divorce, and get their dowry back after a divorce.
Historians generally believe women were not soldiers, though some legends relate stories of women warriors called shield maidens.
Viking society was organized by families and clans.
Clans lived in villages or towns.
Several families often lived together in long wooden houses with thatched roofs.
Families worked together to accumulate wealth and protect the interests of the clan.
Chieftains were chosen from powerful families to rule over the clan.
Remnants including articles of clothing found in a grave helped historians dress this model of a Viking woman authentically.
Thralls, Karls, Jarls, and Things
The Vikings had a rigid class system.
Thralls were of the lowest class.
They were captured in raids, sentenced to slavery through crimes, or were working to pay off debts.
Thralls enjoyed few rights even after they were freed.
Norse Mythology
The tales of the early people of Scandinavia are known as Norse mythology.
In these myths, Valhalla was the heaven for warriors.
The powerful Norse god Odin ruled over it, only allowing warriors who died bravely to go there.
Valhalla was a vast banquet hall.
Female spirits called Valkyries watched over battlefields.
They brought dead heroes to Valhalla.
It was said that the dead warriors would enjoy Valhalla until the end of the world.
Then they would rise again to fight against evil giants and demons in a final battle called Ragnarök.
This illustration from a fourteenth-century manuscript displays a Swedish king in disguise speaking to the Norse god Odin about the beginning of the world.
This drawing of a Viking farmhouse in Iceland is based on archaeological excavations.
The roofs of the buildings were made of turf, a dense layer of grass.
Karls were people of the middle class.
They were farmers, artisans, traders, and soldiers.
Unlike a thrall, a karl could own land, a mark of true wealth.
A karl could attain enough wealth, land, and status to become a jarl.
Jarls were the most powerful Vikings.
They held much land and demanded tribute from people living in their region.
Karls gave jarls support willingly in times of war and foreign expeditions, for jarls were the ones who provided ships for trading or raiding parties.
A few jarls were able to defeat rivals and achieve status as kings.
Scandinavians also had a highly developed legal system, perhaps the most democratic in the world at that time.
An assembly called the thing allowed the community to reach decisions on matters by voting.
All freemen could participate.
The thing was also a place to settle disputes and try people for crimes.
Sometimes two people at odds settled by fighting to the death.
Guilty people could also be banished from the community, becoming exiles who by law could be killed on sight.
Such a developed civilization does not correlate with the Viking savage barbarian stereotype.
But Viking raiders did not turn to pillaging for arbitrary reasons.
Rather, historians believe Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish warriors were probably prompted to undertake raids by a combination of factors including overpopulation at home, a shortage of land, and the helplessness of victims abroad.
Scandinavians trained from childhood to be strong and self-reliant warriors.
Running, jumping, and wrestling took the place of reading, writing, and math.
As soon as a boy could carry a weapon, he was taught to thrust a sword, to swing a battle-ax, and to throw a spear.
Weapons
All Vikings had weapons on them at all times, not just the Vikings on raids.
In fact, a Viking saying was: "Don't leave your weapons behind when you go to work in the fields - you may need them."
Viking men and women carried knives.
In battle, warriors used swords, axes, spears, and bows and arrows.
The Viking's most important possession was his long sword, which was iron and doubled-edged.
Some swords had names and were decorated to show importance.
Weapons were passed down family lines or buried with a warrior.
These are two double-edged swords from the Viking Age.
The swords often had a fuller, which is a groove running along the flat of the blade.
Armor
Viking warriors wore helmets in battle, but contrary to popular belief, they probably did not wear helmets with horns.
No horned helmets have ever been found with Viking remains, nor are they depicted in carvings, tapestries, or on other objects from that age.
Most Vikings did not wear much armor, though chieftains sometimes donned chainmail coats.
Armor was expensive, but also heavy in battle.
Vikings relied on round wooden shields for protection.
Shields were riveted together with iron for strength and then painted with designs.
They could be temporarily attached to the side of a Viking ship for extra defense.
Heeding the Hird
The basis for many Viking armies was the hird, the personal retinue of a chieftain or king.
This force was fed, housed, and paid with silver and gold to retain loyalty, so it was not usually large.
Even the most powerful kings rarely had hirds larger than a few hundred warriors.
In times of war and overseas expeditions, a hird was joined by freemen chosen by a chieftain.
There were advantages for men to join a hird.
It was a way to gain power and riches that they might not have had the opportunity to gain at home, especially if they were not to inherit land.
The first overseas raids consisted of the combined forces of several chieftains' hirds.
This helmet was found in the remains of a Vendel boat grave.
The Vendel period was a time in Swedish history preceding the Viking Age.
Viking helmets would have looked similar.
Hird discipline was based on each warrior's honor, which bound him to his chieftain or king.
To keep his honor, which was all-important, a warrior pledged to follow certain rules, which may have included promising not to switch allegiance to another chieftain, swearing not to fight another member of the hird on punishment of being exiled, and promising to kill any exiled member of the hird on sight.
Offences often meant losing a seat of honor at the great feasts held by the chieftain.
A warrior's rank was determined by how close he sat to the chieftain on these occasions.
At a Viking festival in Great Britain, reenactors form a shield wall, a military tactic in many cultures, but wielded most successfully by the Romans and Vikings.
Battle Tactics
Viking battle tactics included the shield wall, a device once used by the ancient Romans.
In this maneuver, warriors standing side by side placed their shields in front of them, protecting their bodies and creating a wall.
They held their spears overhead and moved forward to attack the enemy The shield wall was used by enemy forces as well, so a shield-wedge was used to counteract it.
In this maneuver, warriors marched in a wedge shape and moved forward to force a hole in the adversary's shield wall by putting pressure on a certain point.
In a shield-burg, a small number of warriors used their shields to create a sort of fortress around themselves, in front, in back, and overhead.
This was effective when trying to deflect spears and arrows.
However, overall, Viking forces employed few maneuvers in war, relying instead on the combined heroics and ferocity of individuals.
The Berserkers
Certain warriors believed the god Odin gave them special powers of protection in battle.
Called berserkers, they went "berserk" in battle, and their savagery and animal-skin attire contributed to the development of the werewolf legend in Europe.
The berserkers were in the habit of murdering at will (going "berserk") and thought little of their own protection.
They believed that dying in battle would gain them entrance to Valhalla in the afterlife.
Shipbuilding
All the Vikings' fierceness would have meant very little if they were not such talented shipbuilders.
They could not have navigated out of Scandinavia without their exceptional vessels.
The most famous of these were known as longships, also called dragon ships, which were made of long overlapping planks of wood held in place by wood pegs and iron rivets.
Ranging from 45 to 75 feet (14 to 23 meters) long, many ships had decorated prows, usually a wooden figurehead carved to look like a ferocious beast.
A single wool sail propelled the longship, but when the wind was lacking, Vikings used long oars to push the ship as fast as 10 miles (16 kilometers) per hour.
The Vikings navigated using landmarks as well as the sun and stars, an amazing feat that took Norseman Leif Eriksson to America in 1000.
The Vikings used their ships for piracy as well as raids.
Viking raids usually consisted of few longships, so that the party kept the element of surprise.
Longships could sail in shallow waters as well as up rivers and be carried onto beaches and banks.
Then the Vikings could quickly attack, plunder, and return to their ships.
However, for full-scale invasions, large fleets of longships were employed.
In 892, an invasion of Britain may have included up to three hundred ships, carrying an army of six thousand Viking warriors.
This is a replica of a vessel called the Gokstad ship that was discovered in a burial mound in Norway thought to be from the ninth century.
Vikings began raiding England in the late eighth century.
The first recorded raid was in 793.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, a collection of accounts of early England, reported: "On the Ides of June the harrying {raiding} of the heathen destroyed God's church on Lindisfarne, bringing ruin and slaughter."
The Vikings even slaughtered the sheep and cattle and feasted on them in the ruins of the church.
They left with chests of loot.
News of the raid terrified both England and mainland Europe.
From the late 700s to the 1000s, the Vikings traveled far from their homeland in Scandinavia.
Some even reached North America.
Raid, Plunder, and Settle
Overseas raids were easy for the Vikings at first.
Churches and monasteries were often targeted as they had silver and gold objects.
Then, towns and cities began fortifying their perimeters with walls.
Viking forces sometimes attempted a siege but usually looked for easier targets.
However, some Vikings were not content to leave with their plunder; they decided to settle in the new territory.
In 865, a Danish force led by the sons of King Ragnar Lothbrok - Halfdan, Ivar the Boneless, and perhaps Hubba - conquered the ancient kingdoms of East Anglia (now eastern England) and Northumbria (modern northern England) and reduced Mercia (central England) to a fraction of its former size.
Some regions tried to give the attacking Vikings money to leave them alone.
At times, the Vikings took the money but still plundered.
Ivar the Boneless saw to the execution of King Edmund of East Anglia.
One account related that Edmund was shot with so many arrows that he looked like a sea urchin "closely set with quills."
Yet, the Vikings could not subdue Wessex, a kingdom in southern England.
At the Battle of Edington, King Alfred the Great met an army of Vikings under the Dane Guthrum.
Alfred's army won the day employing a shield wall.
Knowing he could not force the Danes out of England, Alfred made a truce called the Peace of Wedmore in 878, forcing the Vikings back into already conquered territory.
An illustration from 1953 depicts the Vikings raiding a seaside village in England, burning structures to the ground, and even threatening clergy.
A treaty made around 886 asserted that much of England was in Danish hands.
It split England between the Vikings and English.
The Viking territory, where people would be subject to Danish laws, became known as the Danelaw.
Alfred was king of the remainder of England.
The Battle of Brunaburh
Alfred's son Edward the Elder began the reconquest of England from the Danes, taking territory in Mercia and East Anglia before his death in 924.
Alfred's grandson, Athelstan, became the first true king of England.
He led the English against the Vikings at the Battle of Brunaburh in 937.
Not much is known about this battle, except that the Norse army, which included Celts, used timber-fortified trenches.
They lost to Athelstan's army, who possibly used cavalry for the first time.
With this victory, Athelstan's kingdom absorbed the Danelaw.
Northumbria, under Irish Vikings, resisted.
Upon the accession to power of Edward's son Eadred, the Northumbrians acknowledged his rule but soon proclaimed as their king Erik Bloodax, son of the Norwegian ruler Harald I Fairhair.
In revenge, Eadred ravaged all of Northumbria in 948.
The Northumbrians submitted, but in 949 accepted another Norse king, Olaf Sihtricson.
In 954, the Northumbrians then resumed their allegiance to Eadred.
This is an early-twentieth-century artist's idea of what King Athelstan of England might have looked like.
The mighty king led his people against Viking incursions.
Viking Burials
Before they were Christianized, it was common for Vikings to be cremated after death.
But Vikings sometimes honored their dead with boat burials.
It was thought that the boat would take the dead to their final destination.
Famous raiders and well-known jarls might be given a boat funeral, taking weapons, goods, and even slaves that were sacrificed.
This Viking vessel, called the Oseberg ship, was uncovered by archaeologists on a farm in Norway.
Dating from around 800, it was part of a burial mound.
Raids Renewed
Viking raids on England began again in 980.
In 991, a party led by the king of Norway, Olaf Tryggvason, was bribed with tributes by Ethelred II, also called Ethelred the Unready.
That did not stop Olaf from returning with Danish king Sweyn Forkbeard in 994 to demand and receive yet more tribute.
England was absorbed into the empire of the king of Denmark, Canute (or Cnut).
He allowed the English to follow their own laws.
His sons, his successors, were weak, though, and English power was peacefully restored in 1042.
One Last Invasion
The final Viking invasion of England came in 1066.
Norse king Harald Hardrada sailed up the River Humber with his men.
The English king Harold Godwinson marched north with his army and met Hardrada in the long and bloody Battle of Stamford Bridge.
The battle was fought on foot with swords, spears, and axes.
One Viking was said to have taken on forty English soldiers by himself at the bridge.
He was finally speared by a soldier from the water below.
The English took the bridge, Hardrada was shot in the throat with an arrow, and the Vikings were defeated.
The English had repelled the last invasion from Scandinavia.
Though Vikings made ineffective raids during the reign of William I (1066–1087), they were no longer a major threat.
In the western seas, Scandinavian expansion touched practically every possible point.
Settlers poured into Iceland from at least about 900, and from Iceland, colonies were founded in Greenland and attempted in North America.
The same period saw settlements arise in the Orkney, Faroe, and Shetland islands, the Hebrides, and the Isle of Man.
This unusual formation in the earth was revealed to be a Viking tomb in Dagverdarnes, Iceland.
Called a tumulus, it consists of mounds of earth and stones placed over a grave.
Invasion of Ireland
Scandinavian invasions of Ireland are recorded from 795, when an island called Rechru was ravaged.
Historians think this may have been Rathlin Island off the north coast, which held a monastery at that time.
It was looted and set on fire.
From then on, fighting was nonstop, and, although the natives often more than held their own, Scandinavian kingdoms arose around the cities of Dublin, Limerick, and Waterford.
The kings of Dublin for a time felt strong enough for foreign adventure, and in the early tenth century, several of them ruled in both Dublin and Northumberland.
The likelihood that Ireland would be unified under Scandinavian leadership passed with the Battle of Clontarf in 1014.
There, the Scandinavians, supported by some Irish, suffered disastrous defeat at the hands of Irish king Brian Boru.
The medieval Irish text The Wars of the Gaedhil with the Gaill describes what happened when the fleeing Vikings discovered their ships had been carried away by the tide: "They had not at last any place to fly to, but into the sea . . .
and the foreigners were drowned in great numbers by the sea, and they lay in heaps and in hundreds."
Despite victory over the Vikings at the Battle of Clontarf, Irish king Brian Boru was assassinated by Norsemen in 1014.
Yet, the Vikings who had settled there were never truly driven away from Ireland.
In the twelfth century, English invaders of Ireland found the Scandinavians still dominant in Dublin, Waterford, Limerick, Wexford, and Cork.
Eastern Expansion
The eastern Viking expansion was probably a less violent process than that on the Atlantic coasts.
Although there was, no doubt, plenty of raiding in the Baltic, no Viking kingdom was founded with the sword in that area.
Farther south than France - in the Iberian Peninsula and on the Mediterranean coasts - the Vikings raided from time to time but accomplished little of permanence.
Certainly, Viking settlement on the scale of the British Isles was never achieved in the well-defended Carolingian empire (much of modern France, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy under Charlemagne and his successors).
Sporadic raiding did occur, however, until the end of the Viking period.
In 845, Ragnar Lothbrok was said to have sailed his Danish fleet up the Seine River into Paris, France.
There, they hung more than one hundred Frankish prisoners as a sacrifice to Odin.
The Vikings were offered and accepted 7,000 pounds (3,175 kilograms) of silver to leave.
The television show Vikings focuses on famed warrior Ragnar Lothbrok.
Here he (center) leads a fictional band of warriors ashore during a raid.
In the tenth century, settlements on the Seine River became the germ of the duchy of Normandy, the only permanent Viking achievement in what had been the empire of Charlemagne.
Essentially, Normandy was given to the Vikings in exchange for an agreement not to pillage the rest of France.
The Varangian Guard
A further activity of the Scandinavians in the east was in service as mercenaries in Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire, where they formed the Varangian Guard of the emperor.
The first six thousand Vikings were sent by King Vladimir of Russia to his ally.
In 988 Emperor Basil II used this force to defeat an army attempting to overthrow him.
The Varangian Guard continued to serve as bodyguards and shock troops, those employed in battle for sudden attacks.
The Vikings were happy to serve such a wealthy ruler and returned home after their service with extravagant riches.
This illustration from around the twelfth century features the Varangian Guard.
It is found in the Madrid Skylitzes, an illuminated manuscript about the reigns of the Byzantine emperors.
Raiding Russia
The greatest eastern movement of the Scandinavians was that which carried them into the heart of Russia.
They gave them their name Rus, or "Russians."
Although the Scandinavians were at one time dominant in Novgorod, Kiev, and other places, they were rapidly absorbed by the Slavonic population.
The Rus were mainly traders.
Occasionally, however, the Rus attempted voyages of plunder like their kinsmen in the west.
Their existence as a separate people did not continue past 1050 at the latest.
The first half of the eleventh century appears to have seen a new Viking movement toward the east.
A number of Swedish runic stones record the names of men who went with Yngvarr the Far-Traveled on his journeys.
These journeys were to the east (possibly Persia), but only legendary accounts of their precise direction and intention survive.
In Comes Christianity
The Viking Age ended with the coming of Christianity in Europe.
After the eleventh century, the Viking chief became a figure of the past as did his warriors.
Olaf II Haraldsson of Norway, before he became king in 1015, was practically the last Viking chief in the old independent tradition.
Denmark became a conquering power, able to absorb the more unruly elements of its population into its royal armies.
This rune stone is found in Sweden.
Of the seven thousand runic inscriptions worldwide, about half are from the Viking Age.
Echoes of the Vikings
The Vikings' dominance and reign of terror passed.
They settled and assimilated into the many cultures of Europe.
However, their mark on history remains.
While their exploits became the stuff of legends, the Vikings also had a real influence on European life.
Old Norse language is evident in modern English words such as "anger," "bag," "berserk," "dirt," "husband," "knife," "scare," "reindeer," and many, many more.
Numerous towns and cities owe their origin to Norse words, including places that end with -by ("village" or "settlement") and –kirk (from kirkja meaning "church").
A number of the days of the week come from Norse gods' names, including Tuesday (from Tiw's Day; Tiw was the god of justice); Wednesday (from Woden's {Odin's} Day); and Thursday (from Thor's Day; Thor was the hammer-carrying god of thunder and lightning).
King Olaf II Haraldsson's statue is decorated with a wreath at the Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim, Norway.
He is considered a saint in several religions.
In this painting by nineteenth-century artist Mårten Eskil Winge, the Norse god Thor wields his mighty hammer to vanquish several giants.
Another result of Viking warfare was the introduction of taxation in many kingdoms to raise money for defensive structures and armies and to pay tributes and ransoms.
Vikings also helped spread currency, which replaced the exchange of goods as the only means of trade.
Arab merchants bartered with Vikings using gold and silver coins.
In turn, the Vikings used these coins in other places of trade.
Runes
The only written monuments of the Vikings themselves are runes, a writing system first developed by Germanic tribes but adopted by Scandinavians.
In Sweden, there are some 3,500 inscriptions, mostly written on stone.
They were also left in places Viking explorers visited such as Greenland.
Some stone monuments feature runes of poetry, while others are thought to be magical spells.
A Viking called a rune master was believed to be able to harness the power of magical runes.
Runes are also found on Viking swords, pleading with the gods for protection and power during battle.
These coins were discovered in a Viking grave in Sweden dating from the tenth century.
Among them are Arab coins, confirming trade between Arabs and Vikings.
Demystifying the Vikings
Archaeology is helping to dispel some myths of the Viking culture, aiding in the development of a more realistic and balanced picture of these people.
Today, it is possible to visit reconstructed Viking villages to understand more about how these people may have lived.
Birka, Sweden, an early trading center, boasts a re-created Viking harbor and Scandinavia's largest Viking cemetery, including about three thousand graves.
Because Vikings did not keep their own records, their depiction from the point of view of the people they encountered is their lasting reputation.
They were undoubtedly aggressive and violent at times, but probably no more than other contemporary peoples.
While fierce warriors, they were also artisans, shipbuilders, farmers, and explorers.
Both facts and fiction will help keep modern people fascinated by the extraordinary people called Vikings.
arbitrary Not planned or chosen for a particular reason.
assimilate To fully become part of a different society.
berserk Crazy and violent, especially because of anger.
cavalry The part of an army that in the past had soldiers who rode horses.
Celt A member of a group of people who lived mostly in ancient Britain and parts of western Europe.
chainmail A kind of protective clothing that is made up of tiny metal rings that are linked together and that was worn by knights and soldiers in the Middle Ages.
dowry Money or property that a wife or wife's family gives to her husband when the wife and husband marry in some cultures.
duchy An area of land that is controlled by a duke or duchess.
excavation The action of uncovering something by digging away and removing the earth that covers it.
maneuver A planned movement of soldiers.
marauder One who roams about and raids in search of things to steal.
pagan A follower of a religion of many gods.
plunder To steal things from a place, especially by force.
prow The front of a ship.
ransom Money that is paid in order to free someone who has been captured or kidnapped.
ravage To commit destructive actions.
retinue A group of helpers, supporters, or followers.
rivet A special kind of metal bolt or pin that is used to hold pieces of metal together.
siege A military blockade of a city or fortified place to compel it to surrender.
sporadic Occurring occasionally.
tactics The activity or skill of organizing and moving soldiers and equipment in a military battle.
thatched Having a roof made of dried plants.
trance A sleeplike state in which one can move and respond.
tribute Money or goods that a ruler or country gives to another ruler or country, especially for protection.