In the 1700s, a Dutch draper made a startling discovery.
Anthony van Leeuwenhoek had a passion for grinding glass into very precise magnifying lenses.
He used these lenses to look close up at such things as the scrapings from his teeth.
He wrote, “I then most always saw, with great wonder, that in the said matter there were many very little living animalcules (tiny animals), very prettily a-moving.”
Leeuwenhoek became the first person to see and describe bacteria.
Since that time, scientists have identified and classified thousands of minuscule living creatures.
Three important categories of microorganisms - bacteria, algae, and protozoa - will be explored in this book.
Bacteria are prokaryotes.
Prokaryotes don’t have a real nucleus (the “brain” of a cell) the way a eukaryotic cell, such as that of an animal, has.
Bacteria are much more primitive in design.
But their simplicity also allows them to survive in many different environments.
For instance, some bacteria need oxygen; some would be killed by it.
Others, called facultative anaerobes, can live with or without it.
Salmonella, one facultative anaerobe, can cause food poisoning.
Some bacteria are vitally important to life.
Saprophytic bacteria, for instance, help organic matter rot and turn into rich fertile soil for growing new crops.
Other bacteria turn milk into cheese and yogurt.
And yet, bacteria can also cause dangerous diseases.
Some bacteria even create toxins that poison their victims, such as Clostridium tetani, which produces tetanus.
Scientists have used bacteria to create bacterial antibodies to develop vaccines both to fight disease-causing bacteria and the toxins they produce.
Algae are eukaryotes (complex cells) that contain chlorophyll.
This lets them make their own food through photosynthesis, but they are simpler than plants.
Unlike bacteria, all of which are single-celled, algae can range in size.
Many, such as dinoflagellates, are single-celled.
Others are gigantic, such as the Nereocystis luetkeana kelp which can grow to be 115 feet (35 meters) tall.
The word algae comes from a Greek word meaning seaweed, and indeed, seaweed is an important category of algae.
But algae can also be found in freshwater, on rocks, and even on animals.
Many algae are beneficial - for example, carrageenan, made from red algae, is often used to thicken ice cream.
Pfiesteria, on the other hand can cause an algae “bloom” that can kill large amounts of fish.
Women and children harvest and dry spirulina, a blue green algae used as a dietary supplement, in Brandji, Chad, in 2009.
AFP/Getty Images
The word protozoa comes from the Greek words meaning “first animal.”
To get food, some of these eukaryotes can absorb nutrients through their pellicle, or cell covering.
Others devour their prey by surrounding them and entering them into special holes called vacuoles.
In order to find food, many protozoa have special structures that allow them to move.
Most commonly, they use cilia (short, hairlike extensions that work together in waves) or a flagellum (a long whiplike tail) to get around.
Others, like the amoeba, move by the use of pseudopods (false feet).
They simply let some of their watery fluid pour into one area of their body until it forms a long false leg that it can use to propel itself forward.
While many protozoa are harmless, some are parasites, such as the genus Plasmodium, which causes malaria, a disease that kills two million people each year.
Leeuwenhoek and the many scientists who have discovered other bacteria, algae, and protozoa have done much to unlock one of the most mysterious domains of the world.
Scientists today continue to make discoveries by trying to live up to the great lensmaker’s motto: “By diligent labor one discovers matters that could not be discerned before.”
The single-celled organisms called bacteria live on, in, and around most living and nonliving things.
With few exceptions, bacteria can be seen only with the aid of a microscope, and millions of them would fit on the head of a pin.
Parts of a bacterial cell.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Although some bacteria are harmful, many bacterial species are beneficial.
Bacteria that live in the intestines of humans are essential in digesting food.
Other species play a role in fermentation, a process that produces foods such as yogurt and cheese.
Bacteria themselves are vulnerable to infection by viruses called bacteriophages.
The study of bacteria is called bacteriology.
It often is integrated with studies of other microorganisms, or microbes, a diverse group that includes algae, archaea, fungi, and protozoa.
These combined studies are called microbiology.
Bacteria are prokaryotes - that is, they have no distinct nucleus (sometimes called the “command center” of a cell) and they lack most of the internal structures found in the cells of more complex organisms called eukaryotes.
Most biologists classify bacteria as constituting one of three domains of living organisms.
Along with the domain Bacteria, these include the Archaea, which consists of prokaryotic organisms that have distinct molecular characteristics separating them from bacteria, and the Eukarya, which consists of all other organisms, including plants and animals.
Scientists divide the bacteria into groups based on shape: spherical cells, which are labeled as cocci (sing.,
coccus); rod-shaped cells, called bacilli (bacillus); curved rods, known as vibrios; and spiral-shaped bacteria.
The latter group is further divided into spirilla (spirillum), which are rigid, thick spirals; and spirochetes, which are thin and flexible.
Bacilli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, isolated from a lung abscess in a patient with pneumonia.
A.W. Rakosy/EB Inc.
Virtually all bacteria have a cell wall surrounding a cell membrane.
Within the cell membrane lies the cytoplasm, a jellylike substance composed of water, proteins, and other molecules.
A single circular strand of DNA, a complex molecule that carries all the information about how a living thing will look and function, floats freely in the cytoplasm.
So do ribosomes - structures that help the bacteria make proteins.
Many species have independent pieces of DNA called plasmids that can be transferred to other bacteria during reproduction.
In some species, a gelatinous capsule encloses the cell wall.
Cocci, Staphylococcus aureus, in a laboratory culture.
A.W. Rakosy/EB Inc.
Bacteria are found in a great variety of habitats.
One teaspoon (5 milliliters) of fertile soil may contain as many as 500 million individual bacteria.
Some species live on and within other living things, such as animals or fungi (a relationship known as symbiosis).
Bacteria in-habit oceans, deserts, hot springs, and even snow.
They have been found high in the atmosphere, at the bottom of rivers and lakes, and in the deepest mines.
Some species can survive the scorching temperatures of hydrothermal vents (a fissure in the ocean floor from which mineral-rich superheated water issues); polar-dwelling species are well adapted to subzero temperatures.
The bacteria Neisseria flava from the human nasal passage.
A.W. Rakosy/EB Inc.
It is impossible to overstate the importance of bacteria to the natural environment.
Without bacteria, organic matter would not be broken down and soil would not be fertile.
While some bacteria cause disease, scientists also use bacteria to create vaccines to fight infections.
Moreover, researchers have found a variety of ways in which bacteria may be utilized in food production, agriculture, and industry.
The decomposition of organic material (substances that contain carbon) in nature is brought about chiefly by vast numbers of saprophytic bacteria, though saprophytic fungi contribute to the process.
If there were no decay, the remains of dead organisms and the waste of cities would accumulate so fast that they would soon interfere with everyday life.
As saprophytes break down organic matter, such as rotting leaves and dead insects, they enrich the soil by returning minerals and nutrients to it.
A by-product of the decomposition is carbon dioxide, which is used by plants in photosynthesis.
Although plants need nitrogen to grow, plants cannot use nitrogen gas, which is abundant in the air.
Several kinds of bacteria can take nitrogen from the atmosphere and convert it into a form that is usable by plants, a process called nitrogen fixation.
Some nitrogen-fixing bacteria, such as Rhizobium, occupy nodules on roots of legumes (plants such as peas and beans) and live in a mutualistic, or mutually beneficial, relationship with the plants.
Other nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria, such as Azotobacter, are free living and release fixed nitrogen into the soil, where it can then be taken up by a plant’s roots.
Pathogenic bacteria may enter the body in many ways, such as through the mouth or through cuts in the skin.
If they multiply sufficiently they can cause an infection.
The infection may be caused by the microbes themselves, or by poisons called toxins that they produce.
Some toxins, such as those produced by Staphylococcus aureus, are more dangerous than the bacteria.
Plants, too, are vulnerable to bacterial infections, though they are plagued by different species than are animals.
Typical bacteria from infections include beta-hemolytic streptococci, from the sore throat of a child who later developed rheumatic fever.
A.W. Rakosy/EB Inc.
Typical bacteria from infections include Hemophilus influenzae, isolated from a child suffering from spinal meningitis.
A.W. Rakosy/EB Inc.
Macrophages, the principal phagocytic (cell-engulfing) components of the immune system, ingest and destroy foreign particles such as bacteria.
Manfred Kage/Peter Arnold, Inc., (bottom) Encyclopædia Britannica
Algae consists of a large variety of organisms, from those that appear as a green stain on damp rocks and tree trunks to those that form a fine scum on quiet ponds and the massive seaweeds that float in the ocean.
In general, algae are organisms that are made up of one or more eukaryotic cells (cells with a true nucleus) that contain chlorophyll and that are less complex than plants.
Many types of algae consist of single cells.
Others types can form colonies or filaments of cells or, as in kelp, simple tissues.
Approximately 27,000 marine and freshwater species of algae have been described.
Algae are found all over the Earth, particularly in oceans, rivers, lakes, streams, ponds, and marshes.
They sometimes accumulate on the sides of glass aquariums.
Although usually found in water and moist places, some species of algae inhabit the soil and can survive dry conditions for a long time.
Algae may be found on leaves, especially in the tropics and subtropics, and on wood and stones.
Some species live within or on plants and animals.
Certain species capable of tolerating temperatures of 176 °F (80 °C) dwell in and around hot springs, and certain other species live in the snow and ice of the Arctic and Antarctic regions.
Edible algae being dried on a beach near Hisanohama in Fukushima ken (prefecture), Japan.
W.H. Hodge
Marine algae, such as the common seaweeds, are most noticeable on rocky coastlines.
In northern temperate climes they form an almost continuous film over the rocks.
In the tropics they are found on the floors of lagoons, and they are associated with coral reefs and island atolls.
There are several species of algae that contribute to reef formation by secreting calcium carbonate.
In Arctic and Antarctic waters they extend to considerable depths.
In fresh water, the algae growth may be greatly increased by nutrient-rich pollution, such as a runoff that contains fertilizer.
As a group, the algae are not easily defined.
For many years algae were categorized as plants because of their ability to carry out photosynthesis.
Later, the algae were placed within the diverse kingdom Protista (a group of eukaryotic, predominantly single-celled microscopic organisms).
Despite this classification, the major groups of algae do not share a close evolutionary relationship.
Algae play many roles - sometimes beneficial and sometimes harmful, depending upon the species - in the biology of organisms around them.
In the natural world, algae are the chief food source for many fish and other aquatic organisms, and they contribute substantially to the store of oxygen on Earth.
Algae, primarily diatoms, dinoflagellates, and coccolithophorids, which are often collectively called phytoplankton, are the base of the food chain for all marine organisms.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
The word algae comes from the Latin word for seaweeds.
Algae is the plural form of the word alga, which denotes a single algal organism.
Algae species range in size and composition from the tiny single-celled Micromonas to the giant multicellular sea kelps that aggregate into the underwater kelp forests found along continental coastlines.
The sea kelp Nereocystis luetkeana may grow up to 115 feet (35 meters) in length, while Micromonas measures under three microns - the size of a large bacterium - and is visible only under a microscope.
Most algae, regardless of their external color, contain the green pigment chlorophyll.
This substance makes it possible for these algae to use the energy of sunlight to manufacture their own food (carbohydrates) out of carbon dioxide and water via the process of photosynthesis.
Other pigments also are present, giving the different algae the distinct colors that are used as a basis of classification.
The study of certain types of algae lends insight into the evolution of plants.
Such study has shown that green algae and plants are closely related and thus share an evolutionary history.
Green algae and plants share many characteristics, including the composition of their chlorophyll pigments and their cell walls.
Although green algae have no true roots, stems, or leaves, these traits are also characteristic of the Bryophyta, a group of plants that includes mosses and liverworts.
The simplest algae are single-celled organisms that float about in the water and absorb food through their cell walls.
They multiply asexually by various methods, including fission (simple cell division) and a method called budding, in which one cell grows out from another.
Among the larger algae, methods of reproduction vary greatly.
Sometimes a small section breaks away from the main plant to grow into another complete new plant.
This is called fragmentation.
Budding cells may remain clinging to the parent cells.
Sometimes they bud all around the sides and form mats or long chains of cells called filaments.
Some of these filaments and mats float onto rocks in quiet places where the motion of the water is not strong enough to carry them off again.
These filaments cling to the surface while the floating cells wave in the water, gather the food, bud, and spread into feathery, leaflike fronds.
The portion that clings to the rocks or other substrate is called a holdfast.
Green algae covering rocks along the Pacific coast in Oregon.
© liquidlibrary/Jupiterimages
Some species of multicellular algae reproduce by means of spores - tiny collections of reproductive tissue that form on the alga’s surface and are washed away by the water.
When the spores ripen, they are washed off.
These free-floating bodies then develop into adult cells.
A number of the larger algae species can undergo sexual reproduction.
These species produce tiny reproductive bodies called gametes, which are released into the water.
There, the gametes combine with gametes of the opposite sex to form a new alga.
Multicellular algae are commonly categorized into three main groups: the green algae, or Chlorophyta (from the Greek words chlor, meaning “green,” and phyt, meaning “plant”); the brown algae, or Phaeophyta (a name based on the Greek root phaeo, meaning “dusky,” or “dark”); and the red algae, or Rhodophyta (a name derived from the Greek word rhod, meaning “rose,” or “red”).
Most of the red and brown algae are marine species, though there are some rare freshwater species in each group.
Green algae tend to be freshwater inhabitants, though there are some marine species.
Commonly recognized groups of largely single-celled algae include the golden algae, or Chrysophyta (from the Greek word for “golden plant”), and the dinoflagellates.
Most species of golden algae live in fresh water, whereas most species of dinoflagellates live in marine environments.
A third important group of single-celled algae, the diatoms, are closely related to golden algae.
As was mentioned early, blue-green algae make up another group of single-celled organisms that use photosynthesis to create food.
However, because they do not have eukaryotic cells, they are not classified as algae but as a type of chlorophyll-containing bacteria called cyanobacteria.
Many of the most beautiful plants on the seashore are red algae.
There are roughly 5,200–6,000 species of algae in this group, which is called Rhodophyta.
The majority of red algae live in tropical marine habitats, and most species are multicellular.
Red algae have a complex life history, which means they go through several stages of development as independent organisms in order to complete their life cycle.
Most undergo sexual reproduction.
Like many algae, rhodophytes contain chlorophyll and thus are able to photosynthesize their own food.
Red algae also contain the reddish pigment phycoerythrin, which confers on them their characteristic color.
Because of its light-absorbing properties, this pigment enables red algae to live deep beneath the water surface.
A number of species of red algae, such as laver, dulse, and Irish moss, are harvested for food.
Laver (any member of the genus Porphyra) is the source of nori, dried thin sheets of seaweed popular in Japanese cuisine.
Agar and carrageenan, gelatinous substances found in the cell walls of several species of red algae, are important for a variety of commercial applications, including use as a thickening agent in ice cream and other dairy products.
This group of algae includes roughly 1,500 species worldwide.
Most brown algae are marine, and they are found in cold temperate waters.
Species of Fucus, or rock-weed, live in the intertidal zones of rocky shorelines.
There are also some tropical species, such as the free-floating masses of Sargassum.
All phaeophytes are multicellular and range in size from seaweed made up of filaments, such as the species Ectocarpus, to the giant kelp that form underwater forests.
Among the largest of the kelp are members of the genera Laminaria, Macrocystis, and Nerocystis.
Brown algae are so colored because of the presence of a brown pigment called fucoxanthin.
Because the amount of this pigment can vary from species to species, phaeophyte species range in color from olive green to dark brown.
Brown algae may undergo asexual or sexual reproduction.
The spores and gametes produced, respectively, have two flagella of unequal length.
Species of brown algae such as Laminaria digitata, commonly known as kelp, are harvested from kelp beds along rocky shores.
The roots of kelp are often attached to a rocky substrate that is encrusted with Lithothamnion, a species of reef-building algae.
Fredrik Ehrenstrom/Oxford Scientific Films
The phaeophytes are an important source of algin, a substance used in food processing and other industries.
Certain species of brown algae are also used as fertilizer, and several, such as species of Laminaria, are eaten as a vegetable in Asia.
Protozoa, or protozoans, are single-celled microorganisms.
Unlike bacteria and archaea, protozoa are eukaryotic.
This means that they have a distinct nucleus.
Also, unlike single-celled algae, protozoa cannot make their own food, so they eat other organisms.
For this reason, protozoa were once considered animals.
The term protozoan comes from Greek words protos, meaning “first,” and zoion, meaning “animal.”
Protozoa make up a variety of groups of organisms within the kingdom Protista, though these groups do not necessarily share a common evolutionary history.
Paramecium caudatum is an example of a protist.
John J. Lee
Most protozoa are too small to be seen without the aid of a microscope.
Their shapes vary, but all protozoa have several features in common: a nucleus or several nuclei; mitochondria, bodies that perform special metabolic functions (the process of converting food to energy on a cellular level); vacuoles, which perform a number of functions, including digestion and water elimination; and other particles and organelles.
Shafiqa, 14, waits for treatment at a clinic for leishmaniasis in 2010 in Kabul, Afghanistan.
This disease, caused by a protozoan parasite, can lead to severe scarring, often on the face.
Paula Bronstein/Getty Images
Protozoa occur widely in nature, particularly in aquatic environments.
Because they thrive on moisture, protozoa are found in moist soil, fresh water, and oceans.
Some exist as parasites inside the bodies of larger animals.
Certain parasitic protozoa cause disease in humans and other animals.
Each protozoan is a complete living unit.
It feeds, excretes, grows, and reproduces.
Many protozoa have special structures that help them move.
Protozoa traditionally have been classified according to differences in method of locomotion, number of nuclei, type of organelles (tiny organs inside a cell), life cycle, and mode of reproduction.
Ciliated protozoa, or ciliates, are characterized by a covering of short, hairlike structures called cilia.
The cilia move in wavelike patterns and are used like oars to propel the organisms and to help direct food particles into their mouths.
Ciliates have cell membranes, or walls.
The cytoplasm, or cell material, of these protozoa is dotted with small pouches called vacuoles.
Some vacuoles digest food and other vacuoles expel water.
The latter contract to squeeze out water and are therefore called contractile vacuoles.
The paramecium is perhaps the most commonly known example of the ciliates.
The basic shape of a paramecium varies, depending on the species: for example, Paramecium caudatum is elongated and gracefully streamlined and P. bursaria resembles a footprint.
The paramecium swims freely in its search for food such as bacteria.
It captures the prey with its cilia (also shown enlarged).
Enzymes in the food vacuoles digest the prey, and contractile vacuoles expel excess water.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Children nap under a mosquito net in 2010 in Prey Mong Kol, Cambodia.
These nets, which contain a mosquito-killing insecticide, help prevent the insects from infecting people with malaria-causing protozoa.
Paula Bronstein/Getty Images
Apicomplexans represent another type of protozoa.
Unlike ciliates, all apicomplexans are parasites which move passively and anchor themselves firmly inside the organism they invade.
They feed by absorbing fluids, such as blood, from the animal in which they live.
The parasite that causes malaria is the apicomplexan Plasmodium.
This protozoan, which infects red blood cells in birds and reptiles as well as in mammals, occurs worldwide, especially in tropical and temperate zones.
As this volume has illustrated, our lives are interwoven inextricably with microorganisms such as bacteria, algae, and protozoa.
Microbes abound in the soil, in the seas, and in the air, and many species may be found on and within the human body.
Although they usually go unnoticed, microorganisms provide ample evidence of their presence - sometimes unfavorably, as when they produce toxins and cause diseases, and sometimes favorably, as when they play their roles in the fertility of soils.
With regard to Earth’s ecology, in fact, microorganisms are of incalculable value, disintegrating animal and plant remains and converting them to simpler substances that can be recycled in other organisms.
Of course, they are also useful in many other ways - for example, in the production of various foods, chemicals, and antibiotics.
Because microbes are relatively easy for researchers to work with, they provide a simple vehicle for studying the complex processes of life.
They have become a powerful tool for studies in genetics and of vital activities at the molecular level.
This intensive probing into the functions of microbes is ongoing and has resulted in numerous and often unexpected dividends, including the means of controlling many diseases and infections.