Many years ago, there was an Emperor, who was so excessively fond of new clothes, that he spent all his money in dress.
He did not trouble himself in the least about his soldiers; nor did he care to go either to the theatre or the chase, except for the opportunities then afforded him for displaying his new clothes.
He had a different suit for each hour of the day; and as of any other king or emperor, one is accustomed to say, "he is sitting in council," it was always said of him, "The Emperor is sitting in his wardrobe.
"
Time passed merrily in the large town which was his capital; strangers arrived every day at the court.
One day, two rogues, calling themselves weavers, made their appearance.
They gave out that they knew how to weave stuffs of the most beautiful colors and elaborate patterns, the clothes manufactured from which should have the wonderful property of remaining invisible to everyone who was unfit for the office he held, or who was extraordinarily simple in character.
"These must, indeed, be splendid clothes!
" thought the Emperor.
"Had I such a suit, I might at once find out what men in my realms are unfit for their office, and also be able to distinguish the wise from the foolish!
This stuff must be woven for me immediately.
" And he caused large sums of money to be given to both the weavers in order that they might begin their work directly.
So the two pretended weavers set up two looms, and affected to work very busily, though in reality they did nothing at all.
They asked for the most delicate silk and the purest gold thread; put both into their own knapsacks; and then continued their pretended work at the empty looms until late at night.
"I should like to know how the weavers are getting on with my cloth," said the Emperor to himself, after some little time had elapsed; he was, however, rather embarrassed, when he remembered that a simpleton, or one unfit for his office, would be unable to see the manufacture.
To be sure, he thought he had nothing to risk in his own person; but yet, he would prefer sending somebody else, to bring him intelligence about the weavers, and their work, before he troubled himself in the affair.
All the people throughout the city had heard of the wonderful property the cloth was to possess; and all were anxious to learn how wise, or how ignorant, their neighbors might prove to be.
"I will send my faithful old minister to the weavers," said the Emperor at last, after some deliberation, "he will be best able to see how the cloth looks; for he is a man of sense, and no one can be more suitable for his office than he is.
"
So the faithful old minister went into the hall, where the knaves were working with all their might, at their empty looms.
"What can be the meaning of this?
" thought the old man, opening his eyes very wide.
"I cannot discover the least bit of thread on the looms.
" However, he did not express his thoughts aloud.
The impostors requested him very courteously to be so good as to come nearer their looms; and then asked him whether the design pleased him, and whether the colors were not very beautiful; at the same time pointing to the empty frames.
The poor old minister looked and looked, he could not discover anything on the looms, for a very good reason, viz: there was nothing there.
"What!
" thought he again.
"Is it possible that I am a simpleton?
I have never thought so myself; and no one must know it now if I am so.
Can it be, that I am unfit for my office?
No, that must not be said either.
I will never confess that I could not see the stuff.
"
"Well, Sir Minister!
" said one of the knaves, still pretending to work.
"You do not say whether the stuff pleases you.
"
"Oh, it is excellent!
" replied the old minister, looking at the loom through his spectacles.
"This pattern, and the colors, yes, I will tell the Emperor without delay, how very beautiful I think them.
"
"We shall be much obliged to you," said the impostors, and then they named the different colors and described the pattern of the pretended stuff.
The old minister listened attentively to their words, in order that he might repeat them to the Emperor; and then the knaves asked for more silk and gold, saying that it was necessary to complete what they had begun.
However, they put all that was given them into their knapsacks; and continued to work with as much apparent diligence as before at their empty looms.
The Emperor now sent another officer of his court to see how the men were getting on, and to ascertain whether the cloth would soon be ready.
It was just the same with this gentleman as with the minister; he surveyed the looms on all sides, but could see nothing at all but the empty frames.
"Does not the stuff appear as beautiful to you, as it did to my lord the minister?"
asked the impostors of the Emperor's second ambassador; at the same time making the same gestures as before, and talking of the design and colors which were not there.
"I certainly am not stupid!
" thought the messenger.
"It must be, that I am not fit for my good, profitable office!
That is very odd; however, no one shall know anything about it.
" And accordingly he praised the stuff he could not see, and declared that he was delighted with both colors and patterns.
"Indeed, please your Imperial Majesty," said he to his sovereign when he returned, "the cloth which the weavers are preparing is extraordinarily magnificent.
"
The whole city was talking of the splendid cloth which the Emperor had ordered to be woven at his own expense.
And now the Emperor himself wished to see the costly manufacture, while it was still in the loom.
Accompanied by a select number of officers of the court, among whom were the two honest men who had already admired the cloth, he went to the crafty impostors, who, as soon as they were aware of the Emperor's approach, went on working more diligently than ever; although they still did not pass a single thread through the looms.
"Is not the work absolutely magnificent?
" said the two officers of the crown, already mentioned.
"If your Majesty will only be pleased to look at it!
What a splendid design!
What glorious colors!
" and at the same time they pointed to the empty frames; for they imagined that everyone else could see this exquisite piece of workmanship.
"How is this?
" said the Emperor to himself.
"I can see nothing!
This is indeed a terrible affair!
Am I a simpleton, or am I unfit to be an Emperor?
That would be the worst thing that could happen&#8212;Oh!
the cloth is charming," said he, aloud.
"It has my complete approbation.
" And he smiled most graciously, and looked closely at the empty looms; for on no account would he say that he could not see what two of the officers of his court had praised so much.
All his retinue now strained their eyes, hoping to discover something on the looms, but they could see no more than the others; nevertheless, they all exclaimed, "Oh, how beautiful!
" and advised his majesty to have some new clothes made from this splendid material, for the approaching procession.
"Magnificent!
Charming!
Excellent!
" resounded on all sides; and everyone was uncommonly gay.
The Emperor shared in the general satisfaction; and presented the impostors with the riband of an order of knighthood, to be worn in their button-holes, and the title of "Gentlemen Weavers.
"
The rogues sat up the whole of the night before the day on which the procession was to take place, and had sixteen lights burning, so that everyone might see how anxious they were to finish the Emperor's new suit.
They pretended to roll the cloth off the looms; cut the air with their scissors; and sewed with needles without any thread in them.
"See!
" cried they, at last.
"The Emperor's new clothes are ready!
"
And now the Emperor, with all the grandees of his court, came to the weavers; and the rogues raised their arms, as if in the act of holding something up, saying, "Here are your Majesty's trousers!
Here is the scarf!
Here is the mantle!
The whole suit is as light as a cobweb; one might fancy one has nothing at all on, when dressed in it; that, however, is the great virtue of this delicate cloth.
"
"Yes indeed!
" said all the courtiers, although not one of them could see anything of this exquisite manufacture.
"If your Imperial Majesty will be graciously pleased to take off your clothes, we will fit on the new suit, in front of the looking glass.
"
The Emperor was accordingly undressed, and the rogues pretended to array him in his new suit; the Emperor turning round, from side to side, before the looking glass.
"How splendid his Majesty looks in his new clothes, and how well they fit!
" everyone cried out.
"What a design!
What colors!
These are indeed royal robes!
"
"The canopy which is to be borne over your Majesty, in the procession, is waiting," announced the chief master of the ceremonies.
"I am quite ready," answered the Emperor.
"Do my new clothes fit well?
" asked he, turning himself round again before the looking glass, in order that he might appear to be examining his handsome suit.
The lords of the bedchamber, who were to carry his Majesty's train felt about on the ground, as if they were lifting up the ends of the mantle; and pretended to be carrying something; for they would by no means betray anything like simplicity, or unfitness for their office.
So now the Emperor walked under his high canopy in the midst of the procession, through the streets of his capital; and all the people standing by, and those at the windows, cried out, "Oh!
How beautiful are our Emperor's new clothes!
What a magnificent train there is to the mantle; and how gracefully the scarf hangs!
" in short, no one would allow that he could not see these much-admired clothes; because, in doing so, he would have declared himself either a simpleton or unfit for his office.
Certainly, none of the Emperor's various suits, had ever made so great an impression, as these invisible ones.
"But the Emperor has nothing at all on!
" said a little child.
"Listen to the voice of innocence!
" exclaimed his father; and what the child had said was whispered from one to another.
"But he has nothing at all on!
" at last cried out all the people.
The Emperor was vexed, for he knew that the people were right; but he thought the procession must go on now!
And the lords of the bedchamber took greater pains than ever, to appear holding up a train, although, in reality, there was no train to hold.
Most terribly cold it was; it snowed, and was nearly quite dark, and evening - the last evening of the year.
In this cold and darkness there went along the street a poor little girl, bareheaded, and with naked feet.
When she left home she had slippers on, it is true; but what was the good of that?
They were very large slippers, which her mother had hitherto worn; so large were they; and the poor little thing lost them as she scuffled away across the street, because of two carriages that rolled by dreadfully fast.
One slipper was nowhere to be found; the other had been laid hold of by an urchin, and off he ran with it; he thought it would do capitally for a cradle when he some day or other should have children himself.
So the little maiden walked on with her tiny naked feet, that were quite red and blue from cold.
She carried a quantity of matches in an old apron, and she held a bundle of them in her hand.
Nobody had bought anything of her the whole livelong day; no one had given her a single farthing.
She crept along trembling with cold and hunger - a very picture of sorrow, the poor little thing!
The flakes of snow covered her long fair hair, which fell in beautiful curls around her neck; but of that, of course, she never once now thought.
From all the windows the candles were gleaming, and it smelt so deliciously of roast goose, for you know it was New Year's Eve; yes, of that she thought.
In a corner formed by two houses, of which one advanced more than the other, she seated herself down and cowered together.
Her little feet she had drawn close up to her, but she grew colder and colder, and to go home she did not venture, for she had not sold any matches and could not bring a farthing of money: from her father she would certainly get blows, and at home it was cold too, for above her she had only the roof, through which the wind whistled, even though the largest cracks were stopped up with straw and rags.
Her little hands were almost numbed with cold.
Oh!
a match might afford her a world of comfort, if she only dared take a single one out of the bundle, draw it against the wall, and warm her fingers by it.
She drew one out.
"Rischt!
" how it blazed, how it burnt!
It was a warm, bright flame, like a candle, as she held her hands over it: it was a wonderful light.
It seemed really to the little maiden as though she were sitting before a large iron stove, with burnished brass feet and a brass ornament at top.
The fire burned with such blessed influence; it warmed so delightfully.
The little girl had already stretched out her feet to warm them too; but - the small flame went out, the stove vanished: she had only the remains of the burnt-out match in her hand.
She rubbed another against the wall: it burned brightly, and where the light fell on the wall, there the wall became transparent like a veil, so that she could see into the room.
On the table was spread a snow-white tablecloth; upon it was a splendid porcelain service, and the roast goose was steaming famously with its stuffing of apple and dried plums.
And what was still more capital to behold was, the goose hopped down from the dish, reeled about on the floor with knife and fork in its breast, till it came up to the poor little girl; when - the match went out and nothing but the thick, cold, damp wall was left behind.
She lighted another match.
Now there she was sitting under the most magnificent Christmas tree: it was still larger, and more decorated than the one which she had seen through the glass door in the rich merchant's house.
Thousands of lights were burning on the green branches, and gaily-colored pictures, such as she had seen in the shop-windows, looked down upon her.
The little maiden stretched out her hands towards them when - the match went out.
The lights of the Christmas tree rose higher and higher, she saw them now as stars in heaven; one fell down and formed a long trail of fire.
"Someone is just dead!
" said the little girl; for her old grandmother, the only person who had loved her, and who was now no more, had told her, that when a star falls, a soul ascends to God.
She drew another match against the wall: it was again light, and in the lustre there stood the old grandmother, so bright and radiant, so mild, and with such an expression of love.
"Grandmother!
" cried the little one.
"Oh, take me with you!
You go away when the match burns out; you vanish like the warm stove, like the delicious roast goose, and like the magnificent Christmas tree!
" And she rubbed the whole bundle of matches quickly against the wall, for she wanted to be quite sure of keeping her grandmother near her.
And the matches gave such a brilliant light that it was brighter than at noon-day: never formerly had the grandmother been so beautiful and so tall.
She took the little maiden, on her arm, and both flew in brightness and in joy so high, so very high, and then above was neither cold, nor hunger, nor anxiety - they were with God.
But in the corner, at the cold hour of dawn, sat the poor girl, with rosy cheeks and with a smiling mouth, leaning against the wall - frozen to death on the last evening of the old year.
Stiff and stark sat the child there with her matches, of which one bundle had been burnt.
"She wanted to warm herself," people said.
No one had the slightest suspicion of what beautiful things she had seen; no one even dreamed of the splendor in which, with her grandmother she had entered on the joys of a new year.
There was once a little girl who was very pretty and delicate, but in summer she was forced to run about with bare feet, she was so poor, and in winter wear very large wooden shoes, which made her little insteps quite red, and that looked so dangerous!
In the middle of the village lived old Dame Shoemaker; she sat and sewed together, as well as she could, a little pair of shoes out of old red strips of cloth; they were very clumsy, but it was a kind thought.
They were meant for the little girl.
The little girl was called Karen.
On the very day her mother was buried, Karen received the red shoes, and wore them for the first time.
They were certainly not intended for mourning, but she had no others, and with stockingless feet she followed the poor straw coffin in them.
Suddenly a large old carriage drove up, and a large old lady sat in it: she looked at the little girl, felt compassion for her, and then said to the clergyman:
"Here, give me the little girl.
I will adopt her!
"
And Karen believed all this happened on account of the red shoes, but the old lady thought they were horrible, and they were burnt.
But Karen herself was cleanly and nicely dressed; she must learn to read and sew; and people said she was a nice little thing, but the looking-glass said: "Thou art more than nice, thou art beautiful!
"
Now the queen once travelled through the land, and she had her little daughter with her.
And this little daughter was a princess, and people streamed to the castle, and Karen was there also, and the little princess stood in her fine white dress, in a window, and let herself be stared at; she had neither a train nor a golden crown, but splendid red morocco shoes.
They were certainly far handsomer than those Dame Shoemaker had made for little Karen.
Nothing in the world can be compared with red shoes.
Now Karen was old enough to be confirmed; she had new clothes and was to have new shoes also.
The rich shoemaker in the city took the measure of her little foot.
This took place at his house, in his room; where stood large glass-cases, filled with elegant shoes and brilliant boots.
All this looked charming, but the old lady could not see well, and so had no pleasure in them.
In the midst of the shoes stood a pair of red ones, just like those the princess had worn.
How beautiful they were!
The shoemaker said also they had been made for the child of a count, but had not fitted.
"That must be patent leather!
" said the old lady.
"They shine so!
"
"Yes, they shine!
" said Karen, and they fitted, and were bought, but the old lady knew nothing about their being red, else she would never have allowed Karen to have gone in red shoes to be confirmed.
Yet such was the case.
Everybody looked at her feet; and when she stepped through the chancel door on the church pavement, it seemed to her as if the old figures on the tombs, those portraits of old preachers and preachers' wives, with stiff ruffs, and long black dresses, fixed their eyes on her red shoes.
And she thought only of them as the clergyman laid his hand upon her head, and spoke of the holy baptism, of the covenant with God, and how she should be now a matured Christian; and the organ pealed so solemnly; the sweet children's voices sang, and the old music-directors sang, but Karen only thought of her red shoes.
In the afternoon, the old lady heard from everyone that the shoes had been red, and she said that it was very wrong of Karen, that it was not at all becoming, and that in future Karen should only go in black shoes to church, even when she should be older.
The next Sunday there was the sacrament, and Karen looked at the black shoes, looked at the red ones - looked at them again, and put on the red shoes.
The sun shone gloriously; Karen and the old lady walked along the path through the corn; it was rather dusty there.
At the church door stood an old soldier with a crutch, and with a wonderfully long beard, which was more red than white, and he bowed to the ground, and asked the old lady whether he might dust her shoes.
And Karen stretched out her little foot.
"See, what beautiful dancing shoes!
" said the soldier.
"Sit firm when you dance"; and he put his hand out towards the soles.
And the old lady gave the old soldier alms, and went into the church with Karen.
And all the people in the church looked at Karen's red shoes, and all the pictures, and as Karen knelt before the altar, and raised the cup to her lips, she only thought of the red shoes, and they seemed to swim in it; and she forgot to sing her psalm, and she forgot to pray, "Our Father in Heaven!
"
Now all the people went out of church, and the old lady got into her carriage.
Karen raised her foot to get in after her, when the old soldier said,
"Look, what beautiful dancing shoes!
"
And Karen could not help dancing a step or two, and when she began her feet continued to dance; it was just as though the shoes had power over them.
She danced round the church corner, she could not leave off; the coachman was obliged to run after and catch hold of her, and he lifted her in the carriage, but her feet continued to dance so that she trod on the old lady dreadfully.
At length she took the shoes off, and then her legs had peace.
The shoes were placed in a closet at home, but Karen could not avoid looking at them.
Now the old lady was sick, and it was said she could not recover.
She must be nursed and waited upon, and there was no one whose duty it was so much as Karen's.
But there was a great ball in the city, to which Karen was invited.
She looked at the old lady, who could not recover, she looked at the red shoes, and she thought there could be no sin in it; she put on the red shoes, she might do that also, she thought.
But then she went to the ball and began to dance.
When she wanted to dance to the right, the shoes would dance to the left, and when she wanted to dance up the room, the shoes danced back again, down the steps, into the street, and out of the city gate.
She danced, and was forced to dance straight out into the gloomy wood.
Then it was suddenly light up among the trees, and she fancied it must be the moon, for there was a face; but it was the old soldier with the red beard; he sat there, nodded his head, and said, "Look, what beautiful dancing shoes!
"
Then she was terrified, and wanted to fling off the red shoes, but they clung fast; and she pulled down her stockings, but the shoes seemed to have grown to her feet.
And she danced, and must dance, over fields and meadows, in rain and sunshine, by night and day; but at night it was the most fearful.
She danced over the churchyard, but the dead did not dance - they had something better to do than to dance.
She wished to seat herself on a poor man's grave, where the bitter tansy grew; but for her there was neither peace nor rest; and when she danced towards the open church door, she saw an angel standing there.
He wore long, white garments; he had wings which reached from his shoulders to the earth; his countenance was severe and grave; and in his hand he held a sword, broad and glittering.
"Dance shalt thou!
" said he.
"Dance in thy red shoes till thou art pale and cold!
Till thy skin shrivels up and thou art a skeleton!
Dance shalt thou from door to door, and where proud, vain children dwell, thou shalt knock, that they may hear thee and tremble!
Dance shalt thou - !
"
"Mercy!
" cried Karen.
But she did not hear the angel's reply, for the shoes carried her through the gate into the fields, across roads and bridges, and she must keep ever dancing.
One morning she danced past a door which she well knew.
Within sounded a psalm; a coffin, decked with flowers, was borne forth.
Then she knew that the old lady was dead, and felt that she was abandoned by all, and condemned by the angel of God.
She danced, and she was forced to dance through the gloomy night.
The shoes carried her over stack and stone; she was torn till she bled; she danced over the heath till she came to a little house.
Here, she knew, dwelt the executioner; and she tapped with her fingers at the window, and said, "Come out!
Come out!
I cannot come in, for I am forced to dance!
"
And the executioner said, "Thou dost not know who I am, I fancy?
I strike bad people's heads off; and I hear that my axe rings!
"
"Don't strike my head off!
" said Karen.
"Then I can't repent of my sins!
But strike off my feet in the red shoes!
"
And then she confessed her entire sin, and the executioner struck off her feet with the red shoes, but the shoes danced away with the little feet across the field into the deep wood.
And he carved out little wooden feet for her, and crutches, taught her the psalm criminals always sing; and she kissed the hand which had wielded the axe, and went over the heath.
"Now I have suffered enough for the red shoes!
" said she.
"Now I will go into the church that people may see me!
" And she hastened towards the church door: but when she was near it, the red shoes danced before her, and she was terrified, and turned round.
The whole week she was unhappy, and wept many bitter tears; but when Sunday returned, she said, "Well, now I have suffered and struggled enough!
I really believe I am as good as many a one who sits in the church, and holds her head so high!
"
And away she went boldly; but she had not got farther than the churchyard gate before she saw the red shoes dancing before her; and she was frightened, and turned back, and repented of her sin from her heart.
And she went to the parsonage, and begged that they would take her into service; she would be very industrious, she said, and would do everything she could; she did not care about the wages, only she wished to have a home, and be with good people.
And the clergyman's wife was sorry for her and took her into service; and she was industrious and thoughtful.
She sat still and listened when the clergyman read the Bible in the evenings.
All the children thought a great deal of her; but when they spoke of dress, and grandeur, and beauty, she shook her head.
The following Sunday, when the family was going to church, they asked her whether she would not go with them; but she glanced sorrowfully, with tears in her eyes, at her crutches.
The family went to hear the word of God; but she went alone into her little chamber; there was only room for a bed and chair to stand in it; and here she sat down with her Prayer-Book; and whilst she read with a pious mind, the wind bore the strains of the organ towards her, and she raised her tearful countenance, and said, "O God, help me!
"
And the sun shone so clearly, and straight before her stood the angel of God in white garments, the same she had seen that night at the church door; but he no longer carried the sharp sword, but in its stead a splendid green spray, full of roses.
And he touched the ceiling with the spray, and the ceiling rose so high, and where he had touched it there gleamed a golden star.
And he touched the walls, and they widened out, and she saw the organ which was playing; she saw the old pictures of the preachers and the preachers' wives.
The congregation sat in cushioned seats, and sang out of their Prayer-Books.
For the church itself had come to the poor girl in her narrow chamber, or else she had come into the church.
She sat in the pew with the clergyman's family, and when they had ended the psalm and looked up, they nodded and said, "It is right that thou art come!
"
"It was through mercy!
" she said.
And the organ pealed, and the children's voices in the choir sounded so sweet and soft!
The clear sunshine streamed so warmly through the window into the pew where Karen sat!
Her heart was so full of sunshine, peace, and joy, that it broke.
Her soul flew on the sunshine to God, and there no one asked after the RED SHOES.
There was once a Prince who wished to marry a Princess; but then she must be a real Princess.
He travelled all over the world in hopes of finding such a lady; but there was always something wrong.
Princesses he found in plenty; but whether they were real Princesses it was impossible for him to decide, for now one thing, now another, seemed to him not quite right about the ladies.
At last he returned to his palace quite cast down, because he wished so much to have a real Princess for his wife.
One evening a fearful tempest arose, it thundered and lightened, and the rain poured down from the sky in torrents: besides, it was as dark as pitch.
All at once there was heard a violent knocking at the door, and the old King, the Prince's father, went out himself to open it.
It was a Princess who was standing outside the door.
What with the rain and the wind, she was in a sad condition; the water trickled down from her hair, and her clothes clung to her body.
She said she was a real Princess.
"Ah!
we shall soon see that!
" thought the old Queen-mother; however, she said not a word of what she was going to do; but went quietly into the bedroom, took all the bed-clothes off the bed, and put three little peas on the bedstead.
She then laid twenty mattresses one upon another over the three peas, and put twenty feather beds over the mattresses.
Upon this bed the Princess was to pass the night.
The next morning she was asked how she had slept.
"Oh, very badly indeed!
" she replied.
"I have scarcely closed my eyes the whole night through.
I do not know what was in my bed, but I had something hard under me, and am all over black and blue.
It has hurt me so much!
"
Now it was plain that the lady must be a real Princess, since she had been able to feel the three little peas through the twenty mattresses and twenty feather beds.
None but a real Princess could have had such a delicate sense of feeling.
The Prince accordingly made her his wife; being now convinced that he had found a real Princess.
The three peas were however put into the cabinet of curiosities, where they are still to be seen, provided they are not lost.
Wasn't this a lady of real delicacy?
It was lovely summer weather in the country, and the golden corn, the green oats, and the haystacks piled up in the meadows looked beautiful.
The stork walking about on his long red legs chattered in the Egyptian language, which he had learnt from his mother.
The corn-fields and meadows were surrounded by large forests, in the midst of which were deep pools.
It was, indeed, delightful to walk about in the country.
In a sunny spot stood a pleasant old farm-house close by a deep river, and from the house down to the water side grew great burdock leaves, so high, that under the tallest of them a little child could stand upright.
The spot was as wild as the centre of a thick wood.
In this snug retreat sat a duck on her nest, watching for her young brood to hatch; she was beginning to get tired of her task, for the little ones were a long time coming out of their shells, and she seldom had any visitors.
The other ducks liked much better to swim about in the river than to climb the slippery banks, and sit under a burdock leaf, to have a gossip with her.
At length one shell cracked, and then another, and from each egg came a living creature that lifted its head and cried, "Peep, peep.
" "Quack, quack," said the mother, and then they all quacked as well as they could, and looked about them on every side at the large green leaves.
Their mother allowed them to look as much as they liked, because green is good for the eyes.
"How large the world is," said the young ducks, when they found how much more room they now had than while they were inside the egg-shell.
"Do you imagine this is the whole world?
" asked the mother; "Wait till you have seen the garden; it stretches far beyond that to the parson's field, but I have never ventured to such a distance.
Are you all out?
" she continued, rising; "No, I declare, the largest egg lies there still.
I wonder how long this is to last, I am quite tired of it;" and she seated herself again on the nest.
"Well, how are you getting on?
" asked an old duck, who paid her a visit.
"One egg is not hatched yet," said the duck, "it will not break.
But just look at all the others, are they not the prettiest little ducklings you ever saw?
They are the image of their father, who is so unkind, he never comes to see.
"
"Let me see the egg that will not break," said the duck; "I have no doubt it is a turkey's egg.
I was persuaded to hatch some once, and after all my care and trouble with the young ones, they were afraid of the water.
I quacked and clucked, but all to no purpose.
I could not get them to venture in.
Let me look at the egg.
Yes, that is a turkey's egg; take my advice, leave it where it is and teach the other children to swim.
"
"I think I will sit on it a little while longer," said the duck; "as I have sat so long already, a few days will be nothing.
"
"Please yourself," said the old duck, and she went away.
At last the large egg broke, and a young one crept forth crying, "Peep, peep.
" It was very large and ugly.
The duck stared at it and exclaimed, "It is very large and not at all like the others.
I wonder if it really is a turkey.
We shall soon find it out, however when we go to the water.
It must go in, if I have to push it myself.
"
On the next day the weather was delightful, and the sun shone brightly on the green burdock leaves, so the mother duck took her young brood down to the water, and jumped in with a splash.
"Quack, quack," cried she, and one after another the little ducklings jumped in.
The water closed over their heads, but they came up again in an instant, and swam about quite prettily with their legs paddling under them as easily as possible, and the ugly duckling was also in the water swimming with them.
"Oh," said the mother, "that is not a turkey; how well he uses his legs, and how upright he holds himself!
He is my own child, and he is not so very ugly after all if you look at him properly.
Quack, quack!
come with me now, I will take you into grand society, and introduce you to the farmyard, but you must keep close to me or you may be trodden upon; and, above all, beware of the cat.
"
When they reached the farmyard, there was a great disturbance, two families were fighting for an eel's head, which, after all, was carried off by the cat.
"See, children, that is the way of the world," said the mother duck, whetting her beak, for she would have liked the eel's head herself. "
Come, now, use your legs, and let me see how well you can behave.
You must bow your heads prettily to that old duck yonder; she is the highest born of them all, and has Spanish blood, therefore, she is well off.
Don't you see she has a red flag tied to her leg, which is something very grand, and a great honor for a duck; it shows that every one is anxious not to lose her, as she can be recognized both by man and beast.
Come, now, don't turn your toes, a well-bred duckling spreads his feet wide apart, just like his father and mother, in this way; now bend your neck, and say 'quack. '"
The ducklings did as they were bid, but the other duck stared, and said, "Look, here comes another brood, as if there were not enough of us already!
and what a queer looking object one of them is; we don't want him here," and then one flew out and bit him in the neck.
"Let him alone," said the mother; "he is not doing any harm.
"
"Yes, but he is so big and ugly," said the spiteful duck "and therefore he must be turned out.
"
"The others are very pretty children," said the old duck, with the rag on her leg, "all but that one; I wish his mother could improve him a little.
"
"That is impossible, your grace," replied the mother; "he is not pretty; but he has a very good disposition, and swims as well or even better than the others.
I think he will grow up pretty, and perhaps be smaller; he has remained too long in the egg, and therefore his figure is not properly formed;" and then she stroked his neck and smoothed the feathers, saying, "It is a drake, and therefore not of so much consequence.
I think he will grow up strong, and able to take care of himself. "
"The other ducklings are graceful enough," said the old duck.
"Now make yourself at home, and if you can find an eel's head, you can bring it to me.
"
And so they made themselves comfortable; but the poor duckling, who had crept out of his shell last of all, and looked so ugly, was bitten and pushed and made fun of, not only by the ducks, but by all the poultry.
"He is too big," they all said, and the turkey cock, who had been born into the world with spurs, and fancied himself really an emperor, puffed himself out like a vessel in full sail, and flew at the duckling, and became quite red in the head with passion, so that the poor little thing did not know where to go, and was quite miserable because he was so ugly and laughed at by the whole farmyard.
So it went on from day to day till it got worse and worse.
The poor duckling was driven about by every one; even his brothers and sisters were unkind to him, and would say, "Ah, you ugly creature, I wish the cat would get you," and his mother said she wished he had never been born.
The ducks pecked him, the chickens beat him, and the girl who fed the poultry kicked him with her feet.
So at last he ran away, frightening the little birds in the hedge as he flew over the palings.
"They are afraid of me because I am ugly," he said.
So he closed his eyes, and flew still farther, until he came out on a large moor, inhabited by wild ducks.
Here he remained the whole night, feeling very tired and sorrowful.
In the morning, when the wild ducks rose in the air, they stared at their new comrade.
"What sort of a duck are you?
" they all said, coming round him.
He bowed to them, and was as polite as he could be, but he did not reply to their question.
"You are exceedingly ugly," said the wild ducks, "but that will not matter if you do not want to marry one of our family.
"
Poor thing!
he had no thoughts of marriage; all he wanted was permission to lie among the rushes, and drink some of the water on the moor.
After he had been on the moor two days, there came two wild geese, or rather goslings, for they had not been out of the egg long, and were very saucy.
"Listen, friend," said one of them to the duckling, "you are so ugly, that we like you very well.
Will you go with us, and become a bird of passage?
Not far from here is another moor, in which there are some pretty wild geese, all unmarried.
It is a chance for you to get a wife; you may be lucky, ugly as you are.
"
"Pop, pop," sounded in the air, and the two wild geese fell dead among the rushes, and the water was tinged with blood.
"Pop, pop," echoed far and wide in the distance, and whole flocks of wild geese rose up from the rushes.
The sound continued from every direction, for the sportsmen surrounded the moor, and some were even seated on branches of trees, overlooking the rushes.
The blue smoke from the guns rose like clouds over the dark trees, and as it floated away across the water, a number of sporting dogs bounded in among the rushes, which bent beneath them wherever they went.
How they terrified the poor duckling!
He turned away his head to hide it under his wing, and at the same moment a large terrible dog passed quite near him.
His jaws were open, his tongue hung from his mouth, and his eyes glared fearfully.
He thrust his nose close to the duckling, showing his sharp teeth, and then, "splash, splash," he went into the water without touching him, "Oh," sighed the duckling, "how thankful I am for being so ugly; even a dog will not bite me.
" And so he lay quite still, while the shot rattled through the rushes, and gun after gun was fired over him.
It was late in the day before all became quiet, but even then the poor young thing did not dare to move.
He waited quietly for several hours, and then, after looking carefully around him, hastened away from the moor as fast as he could.
He ran over field and meadow till a storm arose, and he could hardly struggle against it.
Towards evening, he reached a poor little cottage that seemed ready to fall, and only remained standing because it could not decide on which side to fall first.
The storm continued so violent, that the duckling could go no farther; he sat down by the cottage, and then he noticed that the door was not quite closed in consequence of one of the hinges having given way.
There was therefore a narrow opening near the bottom large enough for him to slip through, which he did very quietly, and got a shelter for the night.
A woman, a tom cat, and a hen lived in this cottage.
The tom cat, whom the mistress called, "My little son," was a great favorite; he could raise his back, and purr, and could even throw out sparks from his fur if it were stroked the wrong way.
The hen had very short legs, so she was called "Chickie short legs.
" She laid good eggs, and her mistress loved her as if she had been her own child.
In the morning, the strange visitor was discovered, and the tom cat began to purr, and the hen to cluck.
"What is that noise about?
" said the old woman, looking round the room, but her sight was not very good; therefore, when she saw the duckling she thought it must be a fat duck, that had strayed from home.
"Oh what a prize!
" she exclaimed, "I hope it is not a drake, for then I shall have some duck's eggs.
I must wait and see.
" So the duckling was allowed to remain on trial for three weeks, but there were no eggs.
Now the tom cat was the master of the house, and the hen was mistress, and they always said, "We and the world," for they believed themselves to be half the world, and the better half too.
The duckling thought that others might hold a different opinion on the subject, but the hen would not listen to such doubts.
"Can you lay eggs?
" she asked.
"No.
" "Then have the goodness to hold your tongue.
" "Can you raise your back, or purr, or throw out sparks?
" said the tom cat.
"No.
" "Then you have no right to express an opinion when sensible people are speaking.
" So the duckling sat in a corner, feeling very low spirited, till the sunshine and the fresh air came into the room through the open door, and then he began to feel such a great longing for a swim on the water, that he could not help telling the hen.
"What an absurd idea," said the hen.
"You have nothing else to do, therefore you have foolish fancies.
If you could purr or lay eggs, they would pass away.
"
"But it is so delightful to swim about on the water," said the duckling, "and so refreshing to feel it close over your head, while you dive down to the bottom.
"
"Delightful, indeed!
" said the hen, "why you must be crazy!
Ask the cat, he is the cleverest animal I know, ask him how he would like to swim about on the water, or to dive under it, for I will not speak of my own opinion; ask our mistress, the old woman - there is no one in the world more clever than she is.
Do you think she would like to swim, or to let the water close over her head?
"
"You don't understand me," said the duckling.
"We don't understand you?
Who can understand you, I wonder?
Do you consider yourself more clever than the cat, or the old woman?
I will say nothing of myself.
Don't imagine such nonsense, child, and thank your good fortune that you have been received here.
Are you not in a warm room, and in society from which you may learn something.
But you are a chatterer, and your company is not very agreeable.
Believe me, I speak only for your own good.
I may tell you unpleasant truths, but that is a proof of my friendship.
I advise you, therefore, to lay eggs, and learn to purr as quickly as possible.
"
"I believe I must go out into the world again," said the duckling.
"Yes, do," said the hen.
So the duckling left the cottage, and soon found water on which it could swim and dive, but was avoided by all other animals, because of its ugly appearance.
Autumn came, and the leaves in the forest turned to orange and gold.
Then, as winter approached, the wind caught them as they fell and whirled them in the cold air.
The clouds, heavy with hail and snow-flakes, hung low in the sky, and the raven stood on the ferns crying, "Croak, croak.
" It made one shiver with cold to look at him.
All this was very sad for the poor little duckling.
One evening, just as the sun set amid radiant clouds, there came a large flock of beautiful birds out of the bushes.
The duckling had never seen any like them before.
They were swans, and they curved their graceful necks, while their soft plumage shown with dazzling whiteness.
They uttered a singular cry, as they spread their glorious wings and flew away from those cold regions to warmer countries across the sea.
As they mounted higher and higher in the air, the ugly little duckling felt quite a strange sensation as he watched them.
He whirled himself in the water like a wheel, stretched out his neck towards them, and uttered a cry so strange that it frightened himself.
Could he ever forget those beautiful, happy birds; and when at last they were out of his sight, he dived under the water, and rose again almost beside himself with excitement.
He knew not the names of these birds, nor where they had flown, but he felt towards them as he had never felt for any other bird in the world.
He was not envious of these beautiful creatures, but wished to be as lovely as they.
Poor ugly creature, how gladly he would have lived even with the ducks had they only given him encouragement.
The winter grew colder and colder; he was obliged to swim about on the water to keep it from freezing, but every night the space on which he swam became smaller and smaller.
At length it froze so hard that the ice in the water crackled as he moved, and the duckling had to paddle with his legs as well as he could, to keep the space from closing up.
He became exhausted at last, and lay still and helpless, frozen fast in the ice.
Early in the morning, a peasant, who was passing by, saw what had happened.
He broke the ice in pieces with his wooden shoe, and carried the duckling home to his wife.
The warmth revived the poor little creature; but when the children wanted to play with him, the duckling thought they would do him some harm; so he started up in terror, fluttered into the milk-pan, and splashed the milk about the room.
Then the woman clapped her hands, which frightened him still more.
He flew first into the butter-cask, then into the meal-tub, and out again.
What a condition he was in!
The woman screamed, and struck at him with the tongs; the children laughed and screamed, and tumbled over each other, in their efforts to catch him; but luckily he escaped.
The door stood open; the poor creature could just manage to slip out among the bushes, and lie down quite exhausted in the newly fallen snow.
It would be very sad, were I to relate all the misery and privations which the poor little duckling endured during the hard winter; but when it had passed, he found himself lying one morning in a moor, amongst the rushes.
He felt the warm sun shining, and heard the lark singing, and saw that all around was beautiful spring.
Then the young bird felt that his wings were strong, as he flapped them against his sides, and rose high into the air.
They bore him onwards, until he found himself in a large garden, before he well knew how it had happened.
The apple-trees were in full blossom, and the fragrant elders bent their long green branches down to the stream which wound round a smooth lawn.
Everything looked beautiful, in the freshness of early spring.
From a thicket close by came three beautiful white swans, rustling their feathers, and swimming lightly over the smooth water.
The duckling remembered the lovely birds, and felt more strangely unhappy than ever.
"I will fly to those royal birds," he exclaimed, "and they will kill me, because I am so ugly, and dare to approach them; but it does not matter: better be killed by them than pecked by the ducks, beaten by the hens, pushed about by the maiden who feeds the poultry, or starved with hunger in the winter.
"
Then he flew to the water, and swam towards the beautiful swans.
The moment they espied the stranger, they rushed to meet him with outstretched wings.
"Kill me," said the poor bird; and he bent his head down to the surface of the water, and awaited death.
But what did he see in the clear stream below?
His own image; no longer a dark, gray bird, ugly and disagreeable to look at, but a graceful and beautiful swan.
To be born in a duck's nest, in a farmyard, is of no consequence to a bird, if it is hatched from a swan's egg.
He now felt glad at having suffered sorrow and trouble, because it enabled him to enjoy so much better all the pleasure and happiness around him; for the great swans swam round the new-comer, and stroked his neck with their beaks, as a welcome.
Into the garden presently came some little children, and threw bread and cake into the water.
"See," cried the youngest, "there is a new one;" and the rest were delighted, and ran to their father and mother, dancing and clapping their hands, and shouting joyously, "There is another swan come; a new one has arrived.
"
Then they threw more bread and cake into the water, and said, "The new one is the most beautiful of all; he is so young and pretty.
" And the old swans bowed their heads before him.
Then he felt quite ashamed, and hid his head under his wing; for he did not know what to do, he was so happy, and yet not at all proud.
He had been persecuted and despised for his ugliness, and now he heard them say he was the most beautiful of all the birds.
Even the elder-tree bent down its bows into the water before him, and the sun shone warm and bright.
Then he rustled his feathers, curved his slender neck, and cried joyfully, from the depths of his heart, "I never dreamed of such happiness as this, while I was an ugly duckling.
"
There was once a poor Prince, who had a kingdom.
His kingdom was very small, but still quite large enough to marry upon; and he wished to marry.
It was certainly rather cool of him to say to the Emperor's daughter, "Will you have me?
" But so he did; for his name was renowned far and wide; and there were a hundred princesses who would have answered, "Yes!
" and "Thank you kindly.
" We shall see what this princess said.
Listen!
It happened that where the Prince's father lay buried, there grew a rose tree - a most beautiful rose tree, which blossomed only once in every five years, and even then bore only one flower, but that was a rose!
It smelt so sweet that all cares and sorrows were forgotten by him who inhaled its fragrance.
And furthermore, the Prince had a nightingale, who could sing in such a manner that it seemed as though all sweet melodies dwelt in her little throat.
So the Princess was to have the rose, and the nightingale; and they were accordingly put into large silver caskets, and sent to her.
The Emperor had them brought into a large hall, where the Princess was playing at "Visiting," with the ladies of the court; and when she saw the caskets with the presents, she clapped her hands for joy.
"Ah, if it were but a little pussy-cat!
" said she; but the rose tree, with its beautiful rose came to view.
"Oh, how prettily it is made!
" said all the court ladies.
"It is more than pretty," said the Emperor, "it is charming!
"
But the Princess touched it, and was almost ready to cry.
"Fie, papa!
" said she.
"It is not made at all, it is natural!
"
"Let us see what is in the other casket, before we get into a bad humor," said the Emperor.
So the nightingale came forth and sang so delightfully that at first no one could say anything ill-humored of her.
"Superbe!
Charmant!
" exclaimed the ladies; for they all used to chatter French, each one worse than her neighbor.
"How much the bird reminds me of the musical box that belonged to our blessed Empress," said an old knight.
"Oh yes!
These are the same tones, the same execution.
"
"Yes!
yes!
" said the Emperor, and he wept like a child at the remembrance.
"I will still hope that it is not a real bird," said the Princess.
"Yes, it is a real bird," said those who had brought it.
"Well then let the bird fly," said the Princess; and she positively refused to see the Prince.
However, he was not to be discouraged; he daubed his face over brown and black; pulled his cap over his ears, and knocked at the door.
"Good day to my lord, the Emperor!
" said he.
"Can I have employment at the palace?
"
"Why, yes," said the Emperor.
"I want some one to take care of the pigs, for we have a great many of them.
"
So the Prince was appointed "Imperial Swineherd.
" He had a dirty little room close by the pigsty; and there he sat the whole day, and worked.
By the evening he had made a pretty little kitchen-pot.
Little bells were hung all round it; and when the pot was boiling, these bells tinkled in the most charming manner, and played the old melody,
"Ach!
du lieber Augustin,
Alles ist weg, weg, weg!
"*
* "Ah!
dear Augustine!
All is gone, gone, gone!
"
But what was still more curious, whoever held his finger in the smoke of the kitchen-pot, immediately smelt all the dishes that were cooking on every hearth in the city - this, you see, was something quite different from the rose.
Now the Princess happened to walk that way; and when she heard the tune, she stood quite still, and seemed pleased; for she could play "Lieber Augustine"; it was the only piece she knew; and she played it with one finger.
"Why there is my piece," said the Princess.
"That swineherd must certainly have been well educated!
Go in and ask him the price of the instrument.
"
So one of the court-ladies must run in; however, she drew on wooden slippers first.
"What will you take for the kitchen-pot?
" said the lady.
"I will have ten kisses from the Princess," said the swineherd.
"Yes, indeed!
" said the lady.
"I cannot sell it for less," rejoined the swineherd.
"He is an impudent fellow!
" said the Princess, and she walked on; but when she had gone a little way, the bells tinkled so prettily
"Ach!
du lieber Augustin,
Alles ist weg, weg, weg!
"
"Stay," said the Princess.
"Ask him if he will have ten kisses from the ladies of my court.
"
"No, thank you!
" said the swineherd.
"Ten kisses from the Princess, or I keep the kitchen-pot myself.
"
"That must not be, either!
" said the Princess.
"But do you all stand before me that no one may see us.
"
And the court-ladies placed themselves in front of her, and spread out their dresses - the swineherd got ten kisses, and the Princess - the kitchen-pot.
That was delightful!
The pot was boiling the whole evening, and the whole of the following day.
They knew perfectly well what was cooking at every fire throughout the city, from the chamberlain's to the cobbler's; the court-ladies danced and clapped their hands.
"We know who has soup, and who has pancakes for dinner to-day, who has cutlets, and who has eggs.
How interesting!
"
"Yes, but keep my secret, for I am an Emperor's daughter.
"
The swineherd - that is to say - the Prince, for no one knew that he was other than an ill-favored swineherd, let not a day pass without working at something; he at last constructed a rattle, which, when it was swung round, played all the waltzes and jig tunes, which have ever been heard since the creation of the world.
"Ah, that is superbe!
" said the Princess when she passed by.
"I have never heard prettier compositions!
Go in and ask him the price of the instrument; but mind, he shall have no more kisses!
"
"He will have a hundred kisses from the Princess!
" said the lady who had been to ask.
"I think he is not in his right senses!
" said the Princess, and walked on, but when she had gone a little way, she stopped again.
"One must encourage art," said she, "I am the Emperor's daughter.
Tell him he shall, as on yesterday, have ten kisses from me, and may take the rest from the ladies of the court.
"
"Oh - but we should not like that at all!
" said they.
"What are you muttering?
" asked the Princess.
"If I can kiss him, surely you can.
Remember that you owe everything to me.
" So the ladies were obliged to go to him again.
"A hundred kisses from the Princess," said he, "or else let everyone keep his own!
"
"Stand round!
" said she; and all the ladies stood round her whilst the kissing was going on.
"What can be the reason for such a crowd close by the pigsty?
" said the Emperor, who happened just then to step out on the balcony; he rubbed his eyes, and put on his spectacles.
"They are the ladies of the court; I must go down and see what they are about!
" So he pulled up his slippers at the heel, for he had trodden them down.
As soon as he had got into the court-yard, he moved very softly, and the ladies were so much engrossed with counting the kisses, that all might go on fairly, that they did not perceive the Emperor.
He rose on his tiptoes.
"What is all this?
" said he, when he saw what was going on, and he boxed the Princess's ears with his slipper, just as the swineherd was taking the eighty-sixth kiss.
"March out!
" said the Emperor, for he was very angry; and both Princess and swineherd were thrust out of the city.
The Princess now stood and wept, the swineherd scolded, and the rain poured down.
"Alas!
Unhappy creature that I am!
" said the Princess.
"If I had but married the handsome young Prince!
Ah!
how unfortunate I am!
"
And the swineherd went behind a tree, washed the black and brown color from his face, threw off his dirty clothes, and stepped forth in his princely robes; he looked so noble that the Princess could not help bowing before him.
"I am come to despise thee," said he.
"Thou would'st not have an honorable Prince!
Thou could'st not prize the rose and the nightingale, but thou wast ready to kiss the swineherd for the sake of a trumpery plaything.
Thou art rightly served.
"
He then went back to his own little kingdom, and shut the door of his palace in her face.
Now she might well sing,
"Ach!
du lieber Augustin,
Alles ist weg, weg, weg!
"
Far out in the ocean, where the water is as blue as the prettiest cornflower, and as clear as crystal, it is very, very deep; so deep, indeed, that no cable could fathom it: many church steeples, piled one upon another, would not reach from the ground beneath to the surface of the water above.
There dwell the Sea King and his subjects.
We must not imagine that there is nothing at the bottom of the sea but bare yellow sand.
No, indeed; the most singular flowers and plants grow there; the leaves and stems of which are so pliant, that the slightest agitation of the water causes them to stir as if they had life.
Fishes, both large and small, glide between the branches, as birds fly among the trees here upon land.
In the deepest spot of all, stands the castle of the Sea King.
Its walls are built of coral, and the long, gothic windows are of the clearest amber.
The roof is formed of shells, that open and close as the water flows over them.
Their appearance is very beautiful, for in each lies a glittering pearl, which would be fit for the diadem of a queen.
The Sea King had been a widower for many years, and his aged mother kept house for him.
She was a very wise woman, and exceedingly proud of her high birth; on that account she wore twelve oysters on her tail; while others, also of high rank, were only allowed to wear six.
She was, however, deserving of very great praise, especially for her care of the little sea-princesses, her grand-daughters.
They were six beautiful children; but the youngest was the prettiest of them all; her skin was as clear and delicate as a rose-leaf, and her eyes as blue as the deepest sea; but, like all the others, she had no feet, and her body ended in a fish's tail.
All day long they played in the great halls of the castle, or among the living flowers that grew out of the walls.
The large amber windows were open, and the fish swam in, just as the swallows fly into our houses when we open the windows, excepting that the fishes swam up to the princesses, ate out of their hands, and allowed themselves to be stroked.
Outside the castle there was a beautiful garden, in which grew bright red and dark blue flowers, and blossoms like flames of fire; the fruit glittered like gold, and the leaves and stems waved to and fro continually.
The earth itself was the finest sand, but blue as the flame of burning sulphur.
Over everything lay a peculiar blue radiance, as if it were surrounded by the air from above, through which the blue sky shone, instead of the dark depths of the sea.
In calm weather the sun could be seen, looking like a purple flower, with the light streaming from the calyx.
Each of the young princesses had a little plot of ground in the garden, where she might dig and plant as she pleased.
One arranged her flower-bed into the form of a whale; another thought it better to make hers like the figure of a little mermaid; but that of the youngest was round like the sun, and contained flowers as red as his rays at sunset.
She was a strange child, quiet and thoughtful; and while her sisters would be delighted with the wonderful things which they obtained from the wrecks of vessels, she cared for nothing but her pretty red flowers, like the sun, excepting a beautiful marble statue.
It was the representation of a handsome boy, carved out of pure white stone, which had fallen to the bottom of the sea from a wreck.
She planted by the statue a rose-colored weeping willow.
It grew splendidly, and very soon hung its fresh branches over the statue, almost down to the blue sands.
The shadow had a violet tint, and waved to and fro like the branches; it seemed as if the crown of the tree and the root were at play, and trying to kiss each other.
Nothing gave her so much pleasure as to hear about the world above the sea.
She made her old grandmother tell her all she knew of the ships and of the towns, the people and the animals.
To her it seemed most wonderful and beautiful to hear that the flowers of the land should have fragrance, and not those below the sea; that the trees of the forest should be green; and that the fishes among the trees could sing so sweetly, that it was quite a pleasure to hear them.
Her grandmother called the little birds fishes, or she would not have understood her; for she had never seen birds.
"When you have reached your fifteenth year," said the grand-mother, "you will have permission to rise up out of the sea, to sit on the rocks in the moonlight, while the great ships are sailing by; and then you will see both forests and towns.
"
In the following year, one of the sisters would be fifteen: but as each was a year younger than the other, the youngest would have to wait five years before her turn came to rise up from the bottom of the ocean, and see the earth as we do.
However, each promised to tell the others what she saw on her first visit, and what she thought the most beautiful; for their grandmother could not tell them enough; there were so many things on which they wanted information.
None of them longed so much for her turn to come as the youngest, she who had the longest time to wait, and who was so quiet and thoughtful.
Many nights she stood by the open window, looking up through the dark blue water, and watching the fish as they splashed about with their fins and tails.
She could see the moon and stars shining faintly; but through the water they looked larger than they do to our eyes.
When something like a black cloud passed between her and them, she knew that it was either a whale swimming over her head, or a ship full of human beings, who never imagined that a pretty little mermaid was standing beneath them, holding out her white hands towards the keel of their ship.
As soon as the eldest was fifteen, she was allowed to rise to the surface of the ocean.
When she came back, she had hundreds of things to talk about; but the most beautiful, she said, was to lie in the moonlight, on a sandbank, in the quiet sea, near the coast, and to gaze on a large town nearby, where the lights were twinkling like hundreds of stars; to listen to the sounds of the music, the noise of carriages, and the voices of human beings, and then to hear the merry bells peal out from the church steeples; and because she could not go near to all those wonderful things, she longed for them more than ever.
Oh, did not the youngest sister listen eagerly to all these descriptions?
and afterwards, when she stood at the open window looking up through the dark blue water, she thought of the great city, with all its bustle and noise, and even fancied she could hear the sound of the church bells, down in the depths of the sea.
In another year the second sister received permission to rise to the surface of the water, and to swim about where she pleased.
She rose just as the sun was setting, and this, she said, was the most beautiful sight of all.
The whole sky looked like gold, while violet and rose-colored clouds, which she could not describe, floated over her; and, still more rapidly than the clouds, flew a large flock of wild swans towards the setting sun, looking like a long white veil across the sea.
She also swam towards the sun; but it sunk into the waves, and the rosy tints faded from the clouds and from the sea.
The third sister's turn followed; she was the boldest of them all, and she swam up a broad river that emptied itself into the sea.
On the banks she saw green hills covered with beautiful vines; palaces and castles peeped out from amid the proud trees of the forest; she heard the birds singing, and the rays of the sun were so powerful that she was obliged often to dive down under the water to cool her burning face.
In a narrow creek she found a whole troop of little human children, quite naked, and sporting about in the water; she wanted to play with them, but they fled in a great fright; and then a little black animal came to the water; it was a dog, but she did not know that, for she had never before seen one.
This animal barked at her so terribly that she became frightened, and rushed back to the open sea.
But she said she should never forget the beautiful forest, the green hills, and the pretty little children who could swim in the water, although they had not fish's tails.
The fourth sister was more timid; she remained in the midst of the sea, but she said it was quite as beautiful there as nearer the land.
She could see for so many miles around her, and the sky above looked like a bell of glass.
She had seen the ships, but at such a great distance that they looked like sea-gulls.
The dolphins sported in the waves, and the great whales spouted water from their nostrils till it seemed as if a hundred fountains were playing in every direction.
The fifth sister's birthday occurred in the winter; so when her turn came, she saw what the others had not seen the first time they went up.
The sea looked quite green, and large icebergs were floating about, each like a pearl, she said, but larger and loftier than the churches built by men.
They were of the most singular shapes, and glittered like diamonds.
She had seated herself upon one of the largest, and let the wind play with her long hair, and she remarked that all the ships sailed by rapidly, and steered as far away as they could from the iceberg, as if they were afraid of it.
Towards evening, as the sun went down, dark clouds covered the sky, the thunder rolled and the lightning flashed, and the red light glowed on the icebergs as they rocked and tossed on the heaving sea.
On all the ships the sails were reefed with fear and trembling, while she sat calmly on the floating iceberg, watching the blue lightning, as it darted its forked flashes into the sea.
When first the sisters had permission to rise to the surface, they were each delighted with the new and beautiful sights they saw; but now, as grown-up girls, they could go when they pleased, and they had become indifferent about it.
They wished themselves back again in the water, and after a month had passed they said it was much more beautiful down below, and pleasanter to be at home.
Yet often, in the evening hours, the five sisters would twine their arms round each other, and rise to the surface, in a row.
They had more beautiful voices than any human being could have; and before the approach of a storm, and when they expected a ship would be lost, they swam before the vessel, and sang sweetly of the delights to be found in the depths of the sea, and begging the sailors not to fear if they sank to the bottom.
But the sailors could not understand the song, they took it for the howling of the storm.
And these things were never to be beautiful for them; for if the ship sank, the men were drowned, and their dead bodies alone reached the palace of the Sea King.
When the sisters rose, arm-in-arm, through the water in this way, their youngest sister would stand quite alone, looking after them, ready to cry, only that the mermaids have no tears, and therefore they suffer more.
"Oh, were I but fifteen years old," said she: "I know that I shall love the world up there, and all the people who live in it.
"
At last she reached her fifteenth year.
"Well, now, you are grown up," said the old dowager, her grandmother; "so you must let me adorn you like your other sisters;" and she placed a wreath of white lilies in her hair, and every flower leaf was half a pearl.
Then the old lady ordered eight great oysters to attach themselves to the tail of the princess to show her high rank.
"But they hurt me so," said the little mermaid.
"Pride must suffer pain," replied the old lady.
Oh, how gladly she would have shaken off all this grandeur, and laid aside the heavy wreath!
The red flowers in her own garden would have suited her much better, but she could not help herself: so she said, "Farewell," and rose as lightly as a bubble to the surface of the water.
The sun had just set as she raised her head above the waves; but the clouds were tinted with crimson and gold, and through the glimmering twilight beamed the evening star in all its beauty.
The sea was calm, and the air mild and fresh.
A large ship, with three masts, lay becalmed on the water, with only one sail set; for not a breeze stiffed, and the sailors sat idle on deck or amongst the rigging.
There was music and song on board; and, as darkness came on, a hundred colored lanterns were lighted, as if the flags of all nations waved in the air.
The little mermaid swam close to the cabin windows; and now and then, as the waves lifted her up, she could look in through clear glass window-panes, and see a number of well-dressed people within.
Among them was a young prince, the most beautiful of all, with large black eyes; he was sixteen years of age, and his birthday was being kept with much rejoicing.
The sailors were dancing on deck, but when the prince came out of the cabin, more than a hundred rockets rose in the air, making it as bright as day.
The little mermaid was so startled that she dived under water; and when she again stretched out her head, it appeared as if all the stars of heaven were falling around her, she had never seen such fireworks before.
Great suns spurted fire about, splendid fireflies flew into the blue air, and everything was reflected in the clear, calm sea beneath.
The ship itself was so brightly illuminated that all the people, and even the smallest rope, could be distinctly and plainly seen.
And how handsome the young prince looked, as he pressed the hands of all present and smiled at them, while the music resounded through the clear night air.
It was very late; yet the little mermaid could not take her eyes from the ship, or from the beautiful prince.
The colored lanterns had been extinguished, no more rockets rose in the air, and the cannon had ceased firing; but the sea became restless, and a moaning, grumbling sound could be heard beneath the waves: still the little mermaid remained by the cabin window, rocking up and down on the water, which enabled her to look in.
After a while, the sails were quickly unfurled, and the noble ship continued her passage; but soon the waves rose higher, heavy clouds darkened the sky, and lightning appeared in the distance.
A dreadful storm was approaching; once more the sails were reefed, and the great ship pursued her flying course over the raging sea.
The waves rose mountains high, as if they would have overtopped the mast; but the ship dived like a swan between them, and then rose again on their lofty, foaming crests.
To the little mermaid this appeared pleasant sport; not so to the sailors.
At length the ship groaned and creaked; the thick planks gave way under the lashing of the sea as it broke over the deck; the mainmast snapped asunder like a reed; the ship lay over on her side; and the water rushed in.
The little mermaid now perceived that the crew were in danger; even she herself was obliged to be careful to avoid the beams and planks of the wreck which lay scattered on the water.
At one moment it was so pitch dark that she could not see a single object, but a flash of lightning revealed the whole scene; she could see every one who had been on board excepting the prince; when the ship parted, she had seen him sink into the deep waves, and she was glad, for she thought he would now be with her; and then she remembered that human beings could not live in the water, so that when he got down to her father's palace he would be quite dead.
But he must not die.
So she swam about among the beams and planks which strewed the surface of the sea, forgetting that they could crush her to pieces.
Then she dived deeply under the dark waters, rising and falling with the waves, till at length she managed to reach the young prince, who was fast losing the power of swimming in that stormy sea.
His limbs were failing him, his beautiful eyes were closed, and he would have died had not the little mermaid come to his assistance.
She held his head above the water, and let the waves drift them where they would.
In the morning the storm had ceased; but of the ship not a single fragment could be seen.
The sun rose up red and glowing from the water, and its beams brought back the hue of health to the prince's cheeks; but his eyes remained closed.
The mermaid kissed his high, smooth forehead, and stroked back his wet hair; he seemed to her like the marble statue in her little garden, and she kissed him again, and wished that he might live.
Presently they came in sight of land; she saw lofty blue mountains, on which the white snow rested as if a flock of swans were lying upon them.
Near the coast were beautiful green forests, and close by stood a large building, whether a church or a convent she could not tell.
Orange and citron trees grew in the garden, and before the door stood lofty palms.
The sea here formed a little bay, in which the water was quite still, but very deep; so she swam with the handsome prince to the beach, which was covered with fine, white sand, and there she laid him in the warm sunshine, taking care to raise his head higher than his body.
Then bells sounded in the large white building, and a number of young girls came into the garden.
The little mermaid swam out farther from the shore and placed herself between some high rocks that rose out of the water; then she covered her head and neck with the foam of the sea so that her little face might not be seen, and watched to see what would become of the poor prince.
She did not wait long before she saw a young girl approach the spot where he lay.
She seemed frightened at first, but only for a moment; then she fetched a number of people, and the mermaid saw that the prince came to life again, and smiled upon those who stood round him.
But to her he sent no smile; he knew not that she had saved him.
This made her very unhappy, and when he was led away into the great building, she dived down sorrowfully into the water, and returned to her father's castle.
She had always been silent and thoughtful, and now she was more so than ever.
Her sisters asked her what she had seen during her first visit to the surface of the water; but she would tell them nothing.
Many an evening and morning did she rise to the place where she had left the prince.
She saw the fruits in the garden ripen till they were gathered, the snow on the tops of the mountains melt away; but she never saw the prince, and therefore she returned home, always more sorrowful than before.
It was her only comfort to sit in her own little garden, and fling her arm round the beautiful marble statue which was like the prince; but she gave up tending her flowers, and they grew in wild confusion over the paths, twining their long leaves and stems round the branches of the trees, so that the whole place became dark and gloomy.
At length she could bear it no longer, and told one of her sisters all about it.
Then the others heard the secret, and very soon it became known to two mermaids whose intimate friend happened to know who the prince was.
She had also seen the festival on board ship, and she told them where the prince came from, and where his palace stood.
"Come, little sister," said the other princesses; then they entwined their arms and rose up in a long row to the surface of the water, close by the spot where they knew the prince's palace stood.
It was built of bright yellow shining stone, with long flights of marble steps, one of which reached quite down to the sea.
Splendid gilded cupolas rose over the roof, and between the pillars that surrounded the whole building stood life-like statues of marble.
Through the clear crystal of the lofty windows could be seen noble rooms, with costly silk curtains and hangings of tapestry; while the walls were covered with beautiful paintings which were a pleasure to look at.
In the centre of the largest saloon a fountain threw its sparkling jets high up into the glass cupola of the ceiling, through which the sun shone down upon the water and upon the beautiful plants growing round the basin of the fountain.
Now that she knew where he lived, she spent many an evening and many a night on the water near the palace.
She would swim much nearer the shore than any of the others ventured to do; indeed once she went quite up the narrow channel under the marble balcony, which threw a broad shadow on the water.
Here she would sit and watch the young prince, who thought himself quite alone in the bright moonlight.
She saw him many times of an evening sailing in a pleasant boat, with music playing and flags waving.
She peeped out from among the green rushes, and if the wind caught her long silvery-white veil, those who saw it believed it to be a swan, spreading out its wings.
On many a night, too, when the fishermen, with their torches, were out at sea, she heard them relate so many good things about the doings of the young prince, that she was glad she had saved his life when he had been tossed about half-dead on the waves.
And she remembered that his head had rested on her bosom, and how heartily she had kissed him; but he knew nothing of all this, and could not even dream of her.
She grew more and more fond of human beings, and wished more and more to be able to wander about with those whose world seemed to be so much larger than her own.
They could fly over the sea in ships, and mount the high hills which were far above the clouds; and the lands they possessed, their woods and their fields, stretched far away beyond the reach of her sight.
There was so much that she wished to know, and her sisters were unable to answer all her questions.
Then she applied to her old grandmother, who knew all about the upper world, which she very rightly called the lands above the sea.
"If human beings are not drowned," asked the little mermaid, "can they live forever?
do they never die as we do here in the sea?
"
"Yes," replied the old lady, "they must also die, and their term of life is even shorter than ours.
We sometimes live to three hundred years, but when we cease to exist here we only become the foam on the surface of the water, and we have not even a grave down here of those we love.
We have not immortal souls, we shall never live again; but, like the green sea-weed, when once it has been cut off, we can never flourish more.
Human beings, on the contrary, have a soul which lives forever, lives after the body has been turned to dust.
It rises up through the clear, pure air beyond the glittering stars.
As we rise out of the water, and behold all the land of the earth, so do they rise to unknown and glorious regions which we shall never see.
"
"Why have not we an immortal soul?
" asked the little mermaid mournfully; "I would give gladly all the hundreds of years that I have to live, to be a human being only for one day, and to have the hope of knowing the happiness of that glorious world above the stars.
"
"You must not think of that," said the old woman; "we feel ourselves to be much happier and much better off than human beings.
"
"So I shall die," said the little mermaid, "and as the foam of the sea I shall be driven about never again to hear the music of the waves, or to see the pretty flowers nor the red sun.
Is there anything I can do to win an immortal soul?
"
"No," said the old woman, "unless a man were to love you so much that you were more to him than his father or mother; and if all his thoughts and all his love were fixed upon you, and the priest placed his right hand in yours, and he promised to be true to you here and hereafter, then his soul would glide into your body and you would obtain a share in the future happiness of mankind.
He would give a soul to you and retain his own as well; but this can never happen.
Your fish's tail, which amongst us is considered so beautiful, is thought on earth to be quite ugly; they do not know any better, and they think it necessary to have two stout props, which they call legs, in order to be handsome.
"
Then the little mermaid sighed, and looked sorrowfully at her fish's tail.
"Let us be happy," said the old lady, "and dart and spring about during the three hundred years that we have to live, which is really quite long enough; after that we can rest ourselves all the better.
This evening we are going to have a court ball.
"
It is one of those splendid sights which we can never see on earth.
The walls and the ceiling of the large ball-room were of thick, but transparent crystal.
May hundreds of colossal shells, some of a deep red, others of a grass green, stood on each side in rows, with blue fire in them, which lighted up the whole saloon, and shone through the walls, so that the sea was also illuminated.
Innumerable fishes, great and small, swam past the crystal walls; on some of them the scales glowed with a purple brilliancy, and on others they shone like silver and gold.
Through the halls flowed a broad stream, and in it danced the mermen and the mermaids to the music of their own sweet singing.
No one on earth has such a lovely voice as theirs.
The little mermaid sang more sweetly than them all.
The whole court applauded her with hands and tails; and for a moment her heart felt quite gay, for she knew she had the loveliest voice of any on earth or in the sea.
But she soon thought again of the world above her, for she could not forget the charming prince, nor her sorrow that she had not an immortal soul like his; therefore she crept away silently out of her father's palace, and while everything within was gladness and song, she sat in her own little garden sorrowful and alone.
Then she heard the bugle sounding through the water, and thought - "He is certainly sailing above, he on whom my wishes depend, and in whose hands I should like to place the happiness of my life.
I will venture all for him, and to win an immortal soul, while my sisters are dancing in my father's palace, I will go to the sea witch, of whom I have always been so much afraid, but she can give me counsel and help.
"
And then the little mermaid went out from her garden, and took the road to the foaming whirlpools, behind which the sorceress lived.
She had never been that way before: neither flowers nor grass grew there; nothing but bare, gray, sandy ground stretched out to the whirlpool, where the water, like foaming mill-wheels, whirled round everything that it seized, and cast it into the fathomless deep.
Through the midst of these crushing whirlpools the little mermaid was obliged to pass, to reach the dominions of the sea witch; and also for a long distance the only road lay right across a quantity of warm, bubbling mire, called by the witch her turfmoor.
Beyond this stood her house, in the centre of a strange forest, in which all the trees and flowers were polypi, half animals and half plants; they looked like serpents with a hundred heads growing out of the ground.
The branches were long slimy arms, with fingers like flexible worms, moving limb after limb from the root to the top.
All that could be reached in the sea they seized upon, and held fast, so that it never escaped from their clutches.
The little mermaid was so alarmed at what she saw, that she stood still, and her heart beat with fear, and she was very nearly turning back; but she thought of the prince, and of the human soul for which she longed, and her courage returned.
She fastened her long flowing hair round her head, so that the polypi might not seize hold of it.
She laid her hands together across her bosom, and then she darted forward as a fish shoots through the water, between the supple arms and fingers of the ugly polypi, which were stretched out on each side of her.
She saw that each held in its grasp something it had seized with its numerous little arms, as if they were iron bands.
The white skeletons of human beings who had perished at sea, and had sunk down into the deep waters, skeletons of land animals, oars, rudders, and chests of ships were lying tightly grasped by their clinging arms; even a little mermaid, whom they had caught and strangled; and this seemed the most shocking of all to the little princess.
She now came to a space of marshy ground in the wood, where large, fat water-snakes were rolling in the mire, and showing their ugly, drab-colored bodies.
In the midst of this spot stood a house, built with the bones of shipwrecked human beings.
There sat the sea witch, allowing a toad to eat from her mouth, just as people sometimes feed a canary with a piece of sugar.
She called the ugly water-snakes her little chickens, and allowed them to crawl all over her bosom.
"I know what you want," said the sea witch; "it is very stupid of you, but you shall have your way, and it will bring you to sorrow, my pretty princess.
You want to get rid of your fish's tail, and to have two supports instead of it, like human beings on earth, so that the young prince may fall in love with you, and that you may have an immortal soul.
" And then the witch laughed so loud and disgustingly, that the toad and the snakes fell to the ground, and lay there wriggling about.
"You are but just in time," said the witch; "for after sunrise to-morrow I should not be able to help you till the end of another year.
I will prepare a draught for you, with which you must swim to land tomorrow before sunrise, and sit down on the shore and drink it.
Your tail will then disappear, and shrink up into what mankind calls legs, and you will feel great pain, as if a sword were passing through you.
But all who see you will say that you are the prettiest little human being they ever saw.
You will still have the same floating gracefulness of movement, and no dancer will ever tread so lightly; but at every step you take it will feel as if you were treading upon sharp knives, and that the blood must flow.
If you will bear all this, I will help you.
"
"Yes, I will," said the little princess in a trembling voice, as she thought of the prince and the immortal soul.
"But think again," said the witch; "for when once your shape has become like a human being, you can no more be a mermaid.
You will never return through the water to your sisters, or to your father's palace again; and if you do not win the love of the prince, so that he is willing to forget his father and mother for your sake, and to love you with his whole soul, and allow the priest to join your hands that you may be man and wife, then you will never have an immortal soul.
The first morning after he marries another your heart will break, and you will become foam on the crest of the waves. "
"I will do it," said the little mermaid, and she became pale as death.
"But I must be paid also," said the witch, "and it is not a trifle that I ask.
You have the sweetest voice of any who dwell here in the depths of the sea, and you believe that you will be able to charm the prince with it also, but this voice you must give to me; the best thing you possess will I have for the price of my draught.
My own blood must be mixed with it, that it may be as sharp as a two-edged sword.
"
"But if you take away my voice," said the little mermaid, "what is left for me?
"
"Your beautiful form, your graceful walk, and your expressive eyes; surely with these you can enchain a man's heart.
Well, have you lost your courage?
Put out your little tongue that I may cut it off as my payment; then you shall have the powerful draught.
"
"It shall be," said the little mermaid.
Then the witch placed her cauldron on the fire, to prepare the magic draught.
"Cleanliness is a good thing," said she, scouring the vessel with snakes, which she had tied together in a large knot; then she pricked herself in the breast, and let the black blood drop into it.
The steam that rose formed itself into such horrible shapes that no one could look at them without fear.
Every moment the witch threw something else into the vessel, and when it began to boil, the sound was like the weeping of a crocodile.
When at last the magic draught was ready, it looked like the clearest water. "
There it is for you," said the witch.
Then she cut off the mermaid's tongue, so that she became dumb, and would never again speak or sing.
"If the polypi should seize hold of you as you return through the wood," said the witch, "throw over them a few drops of the potion, and their fingers will be torn into a thousand pieces.
" But the little mermaid had no occasion to do this, for the polypi sprang back in terror when they caught sight of the glittering draught, which shone in her hand like a twinkling star.
So she passed quickly through the wood and the marsh, and between the rushing whirlpools.
She saw that in her father's palace the torches in the ballroom were extinguished, and all within asleep; but she did not venture to go in to them, for now she was dumb and going to leave them forever, she felt as if her heart would break.
She stole into the garden, took a flower from the flower-beds of each of her sisters, kissed her hand a thousand times towards the palace, and then rose up through the dark blue waters.
The sun had not risen when she came in sight of the prince's palace, and approached the beautiful marble steps, but the moon shone clear and bright.
Then the little mermaid drank the magic draught, and it seemed as if a two-edged sword went through her delicate body: she fell into a swoon, and lay like one dead.
When the sun arose and shone over the sea, she recovered, and felt a sharp pain; but just before her stood the handsome young prince.
He fixed his coal-black eyes upon her so earnestly that she cast down her own, and then became aware that her fish's tail was gone, and that she had as pretty a pair of white legs and tiny feet as any little maiden could have; but she had no clothes, so she wrapped herself in her long, thick hair.
The prince asked her who she was, and where she came from, and she looked at him mildly and sorrowfully with her deep blue eyes; but she could not speak.
Every step she took was as the witch had said it would be, she felt as if treading upon the points of needles or sharp knives; but she bore it willingly, and stepped as lightly by the prince's side as a soap-bubble, so that he and all who saw her wondered at her graceful-swaying movements.
She was very soon arrayed in costly robes of silk and muslin, and was the most beautiful creature in the palace; but she was dumb, and could neither speak nor sing.
Beautiful female slaves, dressed in silk and gold, stepped forward and sang before the prince and his royal parents: one sang better than all the others, and the prince clapped his hands and smiled at her.
This was great sorrow to the little mermaid; she knew how much more sweetly she herself could sing once, and she thought, "Oh if he could only know that!
I have given away my voice forever, to be with him. "
The slaves next performed some pretty fairy-like dances, to the sound of beautiful music.
Then the little mermaid raised her lovely white arms, stood on the tips of her toes, and glided over the floor, and danced as no one yet had been able to dance.
At each moment her beauty became more revealed, and her expressive eyes appealed more directly to the heart than the songs of the slaves.
Every one was enchanted, especially the prince, who called her his little foundling; and she danced again quite readily, to please him, though each time her foot touched the floor it seemed as if she trod on sharp knives.
The prince said she should remain with him always, and she received permission to sleep at his door, on a velvet cushion.
He had a page's dress made for her, that she might accompany him on horseback.
They rode together through the sweet-scented woods, where the green boughs touched their shoulders, and the little birds sang among the fresh leaves.
She climbed with the prince to the tops of high mountains; and although her tender feet bled so that even her steps were marked, she only laughed, and followed him till they could see the clouds beneath them looking like a flock of birds travelling to distant lands.
While at the prince's palace, and when all the household were asleep, she would go and sit on the broad marble steps; for it eased her burning feet to bathe them in the cold sea-water; and then she thought of all those below in the deep.
Once during the night her sisters came up arm-in-arm, singing sorrowfully, as they floated on the water.
She beckoned to them, and then they recognized her, and told her how she had grieved them.
After that, they came to the same place every night; and once she saw in the distance her old grandmother, who had not been to the surface of the sea for many years, and the old Sea King, her father, with his crown on his head.
They stretched out their hands towards her, but they did not venture so near the land as her sisters did.
As the days passed, she loved the prince more fondly, and he loved her as he would love a little child, but it never came into his head to make her his wife; yet, unless he married her, she could not receive an immortal soul; and, on the morning after his marriage with another, she would dissolve into the foam of the sea.
"Do you not love me the best of them all?
" the eyes of the little mermaid seemed to say, when he took her in his arms, and kissed her fair forehead.
"Yes, you are dear to me," said the prince; "for you have the best heart, and you are the most devoted to me; you are like a young maiden whom I once saw, but whom I shall never meet again.
I was in a ship that was wrecked, and the waves cast me ashore near a holy temple, where several young maidens performed the service.
The youngest of them found me on the shore, and saved my life.
I saw her but twice, and she is the only one in the world whom I could love; but you are like her, and you have almost driven her image out of my mind.
She belongs to the holy temple, and my good fortune has sent you to me instead of her; and we will never part.
"
"Ah, he knows not that it was I who saved his life," thought the little mermaid.
"I carried him over the sea to the wood where the temple stands: I sat beneath the foam, and watched till the human beings came to help him.
I saw the pretty maiden that he loves better than he loves me;" and the mermaid sighed deeply, but she could not shed tears.
"He says the maiden belongs to the holy temple, therefore she will never return to the world.
They will meet no more: while I am by his side, and see him every day.
I will take care of him, and love him, and give up my life for his sake.
"
Very soon it was said that the prince must marry, and that the beautiful daughter of a neighboring king would be his wife, for a fine ship was being fitted out.
Although the prince gave out that he merely intended to pay a visit to the king, it was generally supposed that he really went to see his daughter.
A great company were to go with him.
The little mermaid smiled, and shook her head.
She knew the prince's thoughts better than any of the others.
"I must travel," he had said to her; "I must see this beautiful princess; my parents desire it; but they will not oblige me to bring her home as my bride.
I cannot love her; she is not like the beautiful maiden in the temple, whom you resemble.
If I were forced to choose a bride, I would rather choose you, my dumb foundling, with those expressive eyes.
" And then he kissed her rosy mouth, played with her long waving hair, and laid his head on her heart, while she dreamed of human happiness and an immortal soul.
"You are not afraid of the sea, my dumb child," said he, as they stood on the deck of the noble ship which was to carry them to the country of the neighboring king.
And then he told her of storm and of calm, of strange fishes in the deep beneath them, and of what the divers had seen there; and she smiled at his descriptions, for she knew better than any one what wonders were at the bottom of the sea.
In the moonlight, when all on board were asleep, excepting the man at the helm, who was steering, she sat on the deck, gazing down through the clear water.
She thought she could distinguish her father's castle, and upon it her aged grandmother, with the silver crown on her head, looking through the rushing tide at the keel of the vessel.
Then her sisters came up on the waves, and gazed at her mournfully, wringing their white hands.
She beckoned to them, and smiled, and wanted to tell them how happy and well off she was; but the cabin-boy approached, and when her sisters dived down he thought it was only the foam of the sea which he saw.
The next morning the ship sailed into the harbor of a beautiful town belonging to the king whom the prince was going to visit.
The church bells were ringing, and from the high towers sounded a flourish of trumpets; and soldiers, with flying colors and glittering bayonets, lined the rocks through which they passed.
Every day was a festival; balls and entertainments followed one another.
But the princess had not yet appeared.
People said that she was being brought up and educated in a religious house, where she was learning every royal virtue.
At last she came.
Then the little mermaid, who was very anxious to see whether she was really beautiful, was obliged to acknowledge that she had never seen a more perfect vision of beauty.
Her skin was delicately fair, and beneath her long dark eye-lashes her laughing blue eyes shone with truth and purity.
"It was you," said the prince, "who saved my life when I lay dead on the beach," and he folded his blushing bride in his arms.
"Oh, I am too happy," said he to the little mermaid; "my fondest hopes are all fulfilled.
You will rejoice at my happiness; for your devotion to me is great and sincere.
"
The little mermaid kissed his hand, and felt as if her heart were already broken.
His wedding morning would bring death to her, and she would change into the foam of the sea.
All the church bells rung, and the heralds rode about the town proclaiming the betrothal.
Perfumed oil was burning in costly silver lamps on every altar.
The priests waved the censers, while the bride and bridegroom joined their hands and received the blessing of the bishop.
The little mermaid, dressed in silk and gold, held up the bride's train; but her ears heard nothing of the festive music, and her eyes saw not the holy ceremony; she thought of the night of death which was coming to her, and of all she had lost in the world.
On the same evening the bride and bridegroom went on board ship; cannons were roaring, flags waving, and in the centre of the ship a costly tent of purple and gold had been erected.
It contained elegant couches, for the reception of the bridal pair during the night.
The ship, with swelling sails and a favorable wind, glided away smoothly and lightly over the calm sea.
When it grew dark a number of colored lamps were lit, and the sailors danced merrily on the deck.
The little mermaid could not help thinking of her first rising out of the sea, when she had seen similar festivities and joys; and she joined in the dance, poised herself in the air as a swallow when he pursues his prey, and all present cheered her with wonder.
She had never danced so elegantly before.
Her tender feet felt as if cut with sharp knives, but she cared not for it; a sharper pang had pierced through her heart.
She knew this was the last evening she should ever see the prince, for whom she had forsaken her kindred and her home; she had given up her beautiful voice, and suffered unheard-of pain daily for him, while he knew nothing of it.
This was the last evening that she would breathe the same air with him, or gaze on the starry sky and the deep sea; an eternal night, without a thought or a dream, awaited her: she had no soul and now she could never win one.
All was joy and gayety on board ship till long after midnight; she laughed and danced with the rest, while the thoughts of death were in her heart.
The prince kissed his beautiful bride, while she played with his raven hair, till they went arm-in-arm to rest in the splendid tent.
Then all became still on board the ship; the helmsman, alone awake, stood at the helm.
The little mermaid leaned her white arms on the edge of the vessel, and looked towards the east for the first blush of morning, for that first ray of dawn that would bring her death.
She saw her sisters rising out of the flood: they were as pale as herself; but their long beautiful hair waved no more in the wind, and had been cut off.
"We have given our hair to the witch," said they, "to obtain help for you, that you may not die to-night.
She has given us a knife: here it is, see it is very sharp.
Before the sun rises you must plunge it into the heart of the prince; when the warm blood falls upon your feet they will grow together again, and form into a fish's tail, and you will be once more a mermaid, and return to us to live out your three hundred years before you die and change into the salt sea foam.
Haste, then; he or you must die before sunrise.
Our old grandmother moans so for you, that her white hair is falling off from sorrow, as ours fell under the witch's scissors.
Kill the prince and come back; hasten: do you not see the first red streaks in the sky?
In a few minutes the sun will rise, and you must die.
" And then they sighed deeply and mournfully, and sank down beneath the waves.
The little mermaid drew back the crimson curtain of the tent, and beheld the fair bride with her head resting on the prince's breast.
She bent down and kissed his fair brow, then looked at the sky on which the rosy dawn grew brighter and brighter; then she glanced at the sharp knife, and again fixed her eyes on the prince, who whispered the name of his bride in his dreams.
She was in his thoughts, and the knife trembled in the hand of the little mermaid: then she flung it far away from her into the waves; the water turned red where it fell, and the drops that spurted up looked like blood.
She cast one more lingering, half-fainting glance at the prince, and then threw herself from the ship into the sea, and thought her body was dissolving into foam.
The sun rose above the waves, and his warm rays fell on the cold foam of the little mermaid, who did not feel as if she were dying.
She saw the bright sun, and all around her floated hundreds of transparent beautiful beings; she could see through them the white sails of the ship, and the red clouds in the sky; their speech was melodious, but too ethereal to be heard by mortal ears, as they were also unseen by mortal eyes.
The little mermaid perceived that she had a body like theirs, and that she continued to rise higher and higher out of the foam.
"Where am I?
" asked she, and her voice sounded ethereal, as the voice of those who were with her; no earthly music could imitate it.
"Among the daughters of the air," answered one of them.
"A mermaid has not an immortal soul, nor can she obtain one unless she wins the love of a human being.
On the power of another hangs her eternal destiny.
But the daughters of the air, although they do not possess an immortal soul, can, by their good deeds, procure one for themselves.
We fly to warm countries, and cool the sultry air that destroys mankind with the pestilence.
We carry the perfume of the flowers to spread health and restoration.
After we have striven for three hundred years to all the good in our power, we receive an immortal soul and take part in the happiness of mankind.
You, poor little mermaid, have tried with your whole heart to do as we are doing; you have suffered and endured and raised yourself to the spirit-world by your good deeds; and now, by striving for three hundred years in the same way, you may obtain an immortal soul.
"
The little mermaid lifted her glorified eyes towards the sun, and felt them, for the first time, filling with tears.
On the ship, in which she had left the prince, there were life and noise; she saw him and his beautiful bride searching for her; sorrowfully they gazed at the pearly foam, as if they knew she had thrown herself into the waves.
Unseen she kissed the forehead of her bride, and fanned the prince, and then mounted with the other children of the air to a rosy cloud that floated through the aether.
"After three hundred years, thus shall we float into the kingdom of heaven," said she.
"And we may even get there sooner," whispered one of her companions.
"Unseen we can enter the houses of men, where there are children, and for every day on which we find a good child, who is the joy of his parents and deserves their love, our time of probation is shortened.
The child does not know, when we fly through the room, that we smile with joy at his good conduct, for we can count one year less of our three hundred years.
But when we see a naughty or a wicked child, we shed tears of sorrow, and for every tear a day is added to our time of trial!
"
A mother sat there with her little child.
She was so downcast, so afraid that it should die!
It was so pale, the small eyes had closed themselves, and it drew its breath so softly, now and then, with a deep respiration, as if it sighed; and the mother looked still more sorrowfully on the little creature.
Then a knocking was heard at the door, and in came a poor old man wrapped up as in a large horse-cloth, for it warms one, and he needed it, as it was the cold winter season!
Everything out-of-doors was covered with ice and snow, and the wind blew so that it cut the face.
As the old man trembled with cold, and the little child slept a moment, the mother went and poured some ale into a pot and set it on the stove, that it might be warm for him; the old man sat and rocked the cradle, and the mother sat down on a chair close by him, and looked at her little sick child that drew its breath so deep, and raised its little hand.
"Do you not think that I shall save him?
" said she.
"Our Lord will not take him from me!
"
And the old man - it was Death himself - he nodded so strangely, it could just as well signify yes as no.
And the mother looked down in her lap, and the tears ran down over her cheeks; her head became so heavy - she had not closed her eyes for three days and nights; and now she slept, but only for a minute, when she started up and trembled with cold.
"What is that?
" said she, and looked on all sides; but the old man was gone, and her little child was gone - he had taken it with him; and the old clock in the corner burred, and burred, the great leaden weight ran down to the floor, bump!
and then the clock also stood still.
But the poor mother ran out of the house and cried aloud for her child.
Out there, in the midst of the snow, there sat a woman in long, black clothes; and she said, "Death has been in thy chamber, and I saw him hasten away with thy little child; he goes faster than the wind, and he never brings back what he takes!
"
"Oh, only tell me which way he went!
" said the mother.
"Tell me the way, and I shall find him!
"
"I know it!
" said the woman in the black clothes.
"But before I tell it, thou must first sing for me all the songs thou hast sung for thy child!
I am fond of them.
I have heard them before; I am Night; I saw thy tears whilst thou sang'st them!
"
"I will sing them all, all!
" said the mother.
"But do not stop me now - I may overtake him - I may find my child!
"
But Night stood still and mute.
Then the mother wrung her hands, sang and wept, and there were many songs, but yet many more tears; and then Night said, "Go to the right, into the dark pine forest; thither I saw Death take his way with thy little child!
"
The roads crossed each other in the depths of the forest, and she no longer knew whither she should go!
then there stood a thorn-bush; there was neither leaf nor flower on it, it was also in the cold winter season, and ice-flakes hung on the branches.
"Hast thou not seen Death go past with my little child?
" said the mother.
"Yes," said the thorn-bush; "but I will not tell thee which way he took, unless thou wilt first warm me up at thy heart.
I am freezing to death; I shall become a lump of ice!
"
And she pressed the thorn-bush to her breast, so firmly, that it might be thoroughly warmed, and the thorns went right into her flesh, and her blood flowed in large drops, but the thornbush shot forth fresh green leaves, and there came flowers on it in the cold winter night, the heart of the afflicted mother was so warm; and the thorn-bush told her the way she should go.
She then came to a large lake, where there was neither ship nor boat.
The lake was not frozen sufficiently to bear her; neither was it open, nor low enough that she could wade through it; and across it she must go if she would find her child!
Then she lay down to drink up the lake, and that was an impossibility for a human being, but the afflicted mother thought that a miracle might happen nevertheless.
"Oh, what would I not give to come to my child!
" said the weeping mother; and she wept still more, and her eyes sunk down in the depths of the waters, and became two precious pearls; but the water bore her up, as if she sat in a swing, and she flew in the rocking waves to the shore on the opposite side, where there stood a mile-broad, strange house, one knew not if it were a mountain with forests and caverns, or if it were built up; but the poor mother could not see it; she had wept her eyes out.
"Where shall I find Death, who took away my little child?
" said she.
"He has not come here yet!
" said the old grave woman, who was appointed to look after Death's great greenhouse!
"How have you been able to find the way hither?
And who has helped you?
"
"OUR LORD has helped me," said she.
"He is merciful, and you will also be so!
Where shall I find my little child?
"
"Nay, I know not," said the woman, "and you cannot see!
Many flowers and trees have withered this night; Death will soon come and plant them over again!
You certainly know that every person has his or her life's tree or flower, just as everyone happens to be settled; they look like other plants, but they have pulsations of the heart.
Children's hearts can also beat; go after yours, perhaps you may know your child's; but what will you give me if I tell you what you shall do more?
"
"I have nothing to give," said the afflicted mother, "but I will go to the world's end for you!
"
"Nay, I have nothing to do there!
" said the woman.
"But you can give me your long black hair; you know yourself that it is fine, and that I like!
You shall have my white hair instead, and that's always something!
"
"Do you demand nothing else?
" said she.
"That I will gladly give you!
" And she gave her her fine black hair, and got the old woman's snow-white hair instead.
So they went into Death's great greenhouse, where flowers and trees grew strangely into one another.
There stood fine hyacinths under glass bells, and there stood strong-stemmed peonies; there grew water plants, some so fresh, others half sick, the water-snakes lay down on them, and black crabs pinched their stalks.
There stood beautiful palm-trees, oaks, and plantains; there stood parsley and flowering thyme: every tree and every flower had its name; each of them was a human life, the human frame still lived - one in China, and another in Greenland - round about in the world.
There were large trees in small pots, so that they stood so stunted in growth, and ready to burst the pots; in other places, there was a little dull flower in rich mould, with moss round about it, and it was so petted and nursed.
But the distressed mother bent down over all the smallest plants, and heard within them how the human heart beat; and amongst millions she knew her child's.
"There it is!
" cried she, and stretched her hands out over a little blue crocus, that hung quite sickly on one side.
"Don't touch the flower!
" said the old woman.
"But place yourself here, and when Death comes - I expect him every moment - do not let him pluck the flower up, but threaten him that you will do the same with the others.
Then he will be afraid!
He is responsible for them to OUR LORD, and no one dares to pluck them up before HE gives leave.
"
All at once an icy cold rushed through the great hall, and the blind mother could feel that it was Death that came.
"How hast thou been able to find thy way hither?
" he asked.
"How couldst thou come quicker than I?
"
"I am a mother," said she.
And Death stretched out his long hand towards the fine little flower, but she held her hands fast around his, so tight, and yet afraid that she should touch one of the leaves.
Then Death blew on her hands, and she felt that it was colder than the cold wind, and her hands fell down powerless.
"Thou canst not do anything against me!
" said Death.
"But OUR LORD can!
" said she.
"I only do His bidding!
" said Death.
"I am His gardener, I take all His flowers and trees, and plant them out in the great garden of Paradise, in the unknown land; but how they grow there, and how it is there I dare not tell thee.
"
"Give me back my child!
" said the mother, and she wept and prayed.
At once she seized hold of two beautiful flowers close by, with each hand, and cried out to Death, "I will tear all thy flowers off, for I am in despair.
"
"Touch them not!
" said Death.
"Thou say'st that thou art so unhappy, and now thou wilt make another mother equally unhappy.
"
"Another mother!
" said the poor woman, and directly let go her hold of both the flowers.
"There, thou hast thine eyes," said Death; "I fished them up from the lake, they shone so bright; I knew not they were thine.
Take them again, they are now brighter than before; now look down into the deep well close by; I shall tell thee the names of the two flowers thou wouldst have torn up, and thou wilt see their whole future life - their whole human existence: and see what thou wast about to disturb and destroy.
"
And she looked down into the well; and it was a happiness to see how the one became a blessing to the world, to see how much happiness and joy were felt everywhere.
And she saw the other's life, and it was sorrow and distress, horror, and wretchedness.
"Both of them are God's will!
" said Death.
"Which of them is Misfortune's flower and which is that of Happiness?
" asked she.
"That I will not tell thee," said Death; "but this thou shalt know from me, that the one flower was thy own child!
it was thy child's fate thou saw'st - thy own child's future life!
"
Then the mother screamed with terror, "Which of them was my child?
Tell it me!
Save the innocent!
Save my child from all that misery!
Rather take it away!
Take it into God's kingdom!
Forget my tears, forget my prayers, and all that I have done!
"
"I do not understand thee!
" said Death.
"Wilt thou have thy child again, or shall I go with it there, where thou dost not know!
"
Then the mother wrung her hands, fell on her knees, and prayed to our Lord: "Oh, hear me not when I pray against Thy will, which is the best!
hear me not!
hear me not!
"
And she bowed her head down in her lap, and Death took her child and went with it into the unknown land.
A soldier came marching along the high road: "Left, right - left, right.
" He had his knapsack on his back, and a sword at his side; he had been to the wars, and was now returning home.
As he walked on, he met a very frightful-looking old witch in the road.
Her under-lip hung quite down on her breast, and she stopped and said, "Good evening, soldier; you have a very fine sword, and a large knapsack, and you are a real soldier; so you shall have as much money as ever you like.
"
"Thank you, old witch," said the soldier.
"Do you see that large tree," said the witch, pointing to a tree which stood beside them.
"Well, it is quite hollow inside, and you must climb to the top, when you will see a hole, through which you can let yourself down into the tree to a great depth.
I will tie a rope round your body, so that I can pull you up again when you call out to me.
"
"But what am I to do, down there in the tree?
" asked the soldier.
"Get money," she replied; "for you must know that when you reach the ground under the tree, you will find yourself in a large hall, lighted up by three hundred lamps; you will then see three doors, which can be easily opened, for the keys are in all the locks.
On entering the first of the chambers, to which these doors lead, you will see a large chest, standing in the middle of the floor, and upon it a dog seated, with a pair of eyes as large as teacups.
But you need not be at all afraid of him; I will give you my blue checked apron, which you must spread upon the floor, and then boldly seize hold of the dog, and place him upon it.
You can then open the chest, and take from it as many pence as you please, they are only copper pence; but if you would rather have silver money, you must go into the second chamber.
Here you will find another dog, with eyes as big as mill-wheels; but do not let that trouble you.
Place him upon my apron, and then take what money you please.
If, however, you like gold best, enter the third chamber, where there is another chest full of it.
The dog who sits on this chest is very dreadful; his eyes are as big as a tower, but do not mind him.
If he also is placed upon my apron, he cannot hurt you, and you may take from the chest what gold you will.
"
"This is not a bad story," said the soldier; "but what am I to give you, you old witch?
for, of course, you do not mean to tell me all this for nothing.
"
"No," said the witch; "but I do not ask for a single penny.
Only promise to bring me an old tinder-box, which my grandmother left behind the last time she went down there.
"
"Very well; I promise.
Now tie the rope round my body.
"
"Here it is," replied the witch; "and here is my blue checked apron.
"
As soon as the rope was tied, the soldier climbed up the tree, and let himself down through the hollow to the ground beneath; and here he found, as the witch had told him, a large hall, in which many hundred lamps were all burning.
Then he opened the first door.
"Ah!
" there sat the dog, with the eyes as large as teacups, staring at him.
"You're a pretty fellow," said the soldier, seizing him, and placing him on the witch's apron, while he filled his pockets from the chest with as many pieces as they would hold.
Then he closed the lid, seated the dog upon it again, and walked into another chamber, And, sure enough, there sat the dog with eyes as big as mill-wheels.
"You had better not look at me in that way," said the soldier; "you will make your eyes water;" and then he seated him also upon the apron, and opened the chest.
But when he saw what a quantity of silver money it contained, he very quickly threw away all the coppers he had taken, and filled his pockets and his knapsack with nothing but silver.
Then he went into the third room, and there the dog was really hideous; his eyes were, truly, as big as towers, and they turned round and round in his head like wheels.
"Good morning," said the soldier, touching his cap, for he had never seen such a dog in his life.
But after looking at him more closely, he thought he had been civil enough, so he placed him on the floor, and opened the chest.
Good gracious, what a quantity of gold there was!
enough to buy all the sugar-sticks of the sweet-stuff women; all the tin soldiers, whips, and rocking-horses in the world, or even the whole town itself There was, indeed, an immense quantity.
So the soldier now threw away all the silver money he had taken, and filled his pockets and his knapsack with gold instead; and not only his pockets and his knapsack, but even his cap and boots, so that he could scarcely walk.
He was really rich now; so he replaced the dog on the chest, closed the door, and called up through the tree, "Now pull me out, you old witch.
"
"Have you got the tinder-box?
" asked the witch.
"No; I declare I quite forgot it.
" So he went back and fetched the tinderbox, and then the witch drew him up out of the tree, and he stood again in the high road, with his pockets, his knapsack, his cap, and his boots full of gold.
"What are you going to do with the tinder-box?
" asked the soldier.
"That is nothing to you," replied the witch; "you have the money, now give me the tinder-box.
"
"I tell you what," said the soldier, "if you don't tell me what you are going to do with it, I will draw my sword and cut off your head.
"
"No," said the witch.
The soldier immediately cut off her head, and there she lay on the ground.
Then he tied up all his money in her apron, and slung it on his back like a bundle, put the tinderbox in his pocket, and walked off to the nearest town.
It was a very nice town, and he put up at the best inn, and ordered a dinner of all his favorite dishes, for now he was rich and had plenty of money.
The servant, who cleaned his boots, thought they certainly were a shabby pair to be worn by such a rich gentleman, for he had not yet bought any new ones.
The next day, however, he procured some good clothes and proper boots, so that our soldier soon became known as a fine gentleman, and the people visited him, and told him all the wonders that were to be seen in the town, and of the king's beautiful daughter, the princess.
"Where can I see her?
" asked the soldier.
"She is not to be seen at all," they said; "she lives in a large copper castle, surrounded by walls and towers.
No one but the king himself can pass in or out, for there has been a prophecy that she will marry a common soldier, and the king cannot bear to think of such a marriage.
"
"I should like very much to see her," thought the soldier; but he could not obtain permission to do so.
However, he passed a very pleasant time; went to the theatre, drove in the king's garden, and gave a great deal of money to the poor, which was very good of him; he remembered what it had been in olden times to be without a shilling.
Now he was rich, had fine clothes, and many friends, who all declared he was a fine fellow and a real gentleman, and all this gratified him exceedingly.
But his money would not last forever; and as he spent and gave away a great deal daily, and received none, he found himself at last with only two shillings left.
So he was obliged to leave his elegant rooms, and live in a little garret under the roof, where he had to clean his own boots, and even mend them with a large needle.
None of his friends came to see him, there were too many stairs to mount up.
One dark evening, he had not even a penny to buy a candle; then all at once he remembered that there was a piece of candle stuck in the tinder-box, which he had brought from the old tree, into which the witch had helped him.
He found the tinder-box, but no sooner had he struck a few sparks from the flint and steel, than the door flew open and the dog with eyes as big as teacups, whom he had seen while down in the tree, stood before him, and said, "What orders, master?
"
"Hallo," said the soldier; "well this is a pleasant tinderbox, if it brings me all I wish for.
"
"Bring me some money," said he to the dog.
He was gone in a moment, and presently returned, carrying a large bag of coppers in his month.
The soldier very soon discovered after this the value of the tinder-box.
If he struck the flint once, the dog who sat on the chest of copper money made his appearance; if twice, the dog came from the chest of silver; and if three times, the dog with eyes like towers, who watched over the gold.
The soldier had now plenty of money; he returned to his elegant rooms, and reappeared in his fine clothes, so that his friends knew him again directly, and made as much of him as before.
After a while he began to think it was very strange that no one could get a look at the princess.
"Every one says she is very beautiful," thought he to himself; "but what is the use of that if she is to be shut up in a copper castle surrounded by so many towers.
Can I by any means get to see her.
Stop!
where is my tinder-box?
" Then he struck a light, and in a moment the dog, with eyes as big as teacups, stood before him.
"It is midnight," said the soldier, "yet I should very much like to see the princess, if only for a moment.
"
The dog disappeared instantly, and before the soldier could even look round, he returned with the princess.
She was lying on the dog's back asleep, and looked so lovely, that every one who saw her would know she was a real princess.
The soldier could not help kissing her, true soldier as he was.
Then the dog ran back with the princess; but in the morning, while at breakfast with the king and queen, she told them what a singular dream she had had during the night, of a dog and a soldier, that she had ridden on the dog's back, and been kissed by the soldier.
"That is a very pretty story, indeed," said the queen.
So the next night one of the old ladies of the court was set to watch by the princess's bed, to discover whether it really was a dream, or what else it might be.
The soldier longed very much to see the princess once more, so he sent for the dog again in the night to fetch her, and to run with her as fast as ever he could.
But the old lady put on water boots, and ran after him as quickly as he did, and found that he carried the princess into a large house.
She thought it would help her to remember the place if she made a large cross on the door with a piece of chalk.
Then she went home to bed, and the dog presently returned with the princess.
But when he saw that a cross had been made on the door of the house, where the soldier lived, he took another piece of chalk and made crosses on all the doors in the town, so that the lady-in-waiting might not be able to find out the right door.
Early the next morning the king and queen accompanied the lady and all the officers of the household, to see where the princess had been.
"Here it is," said the king, when they came to the first door with a cross on it.
"No, my dear husband, it must be that one," said the queen, pointing to a second door having a cross also.
"And here is one, and there is another!
" they all exclaimed; for there were crosses on all the doors in every direction.
So they felt it would be useless to search any farther.
But the queen was a very clever woman; she could do a great deal more than merely ride in a carriage.
She took her large gold scissors, cut a piece of silk into squares, and made a neat little bag.
This bag she filled with buckwheat flour, and tied it round the princess's neck; and then she cut a small hole in the bag, so that the flour might be scattered on the ground as the princess went along.
During the night, the dog came again and carried the princess on his back, and ran with her to the soldier, who loved her very much, and wished that he had been a prince, so that he might have her for a wife.
The dog did not observe how the flour ran out of the bag all the way from the castle wall to the soldier's house, and even up to the window, where he had climbed with the princess.
Therefore in the morning the king and queen found out where their daughter had been, and the soldier was taken up and put in prison.
Oh, how dark and disagreeable it was as he sat there, and the people said to him, "To-morrow you will be hanged.
" It was not very pleasant news, and besides, he had left the tinder-box at the inn.
In the morning he could see through the iron grating of the little window how the people were hastening out of the town to see him hanged; he heard the drums beating, and saw the soldiers marching.
Every one ran out to look at them, and a shoemaker's boy, with a leather apron and slippers on, galloped by so fast, that one of his slippers flew off and struck against the wall where the soldier sat looking through the iron grating.
"Hallo, you shoemaker's boy, you need not be in such a hurry," cried the soldier to him.
"There will be nothing to see till I come; but if you will run to the house where I have been living, and bring me my tinder-box, you shall have four shillings, but you must put your best foot foremost.
"
The shoemaker's boy liked the idea of getting the four shillings, so he ran very fast and fetched the tinder-box, and gave it to the soldier.
And now we shall see what happened.
Outside the town a large gibbet had been erected, round which stood the soldiers and several thousands of people.
The king and the queen sat on splendid thrones opposite to the judges and the whole council.
The soldier already stood on the ladder; but as they were about to place the rope around his neck, he said that an innocent request was often granted to a poor criminal before he suffered death.
He wished very much to smoke a pipe, as it would be the last pipe he should ever smoke in the world.
The king could not refuse this request, so the soldier took his tinder-box, and struck fire, once, twice, thrice, - and there in a moment stood all the dogs; - the one with eyes as big as teacups, the one with eyes as large as mill-wheels, and the third, whose eyes were like towers.
"Help me now, that I may not be hanged," cried the soldier.
And the dogs fell upon the judges and all the councillors; seized one by the legs, and another by the nose, and tossed them many feet high in the air, so that they fell down and were dashed to pieces.
"I will not be touched," said the king.
But the largest dog seized him, as well as the queen, and threw them after the others.
Then the soldiers and all the people were afraid, and cried, "Good soldier, you shall be our king, and you shall marry the beautiful princess.
"
So they placed the soldier in the king's carriage, and the three dogs ran on in front and cried "Hurrah!
" and the little boys whistled through their fingers, and the soldiers presented arms.
The princess came out of the copper castle, and became queen, which was very pleasing to her.
The wedding festivities lasted a whole week, and the dogs sat at the table, and stared with all their eyes.
Far away in the land to which the swallows fly when it is winter, dwelt a king who had eleven sons, and one daughter, named Eliza.
The eleven brothers were princes, and each went to school with a star on his breast, and a sword by his side.
They wrote with diamond pencils on gold slates, and learnt their lessons so quickly and read so easily that every one might know they were princes.
Their sister Eliza sat on a little stool of plate-glass, and had a book full of pictures, which had cost as much as half a kingdom.
Oh, these children were indeed happy, but it was not to remain so always.
Their father, who was king of the country, married a very wicked queen, who did not love the poor children at all.
They knew this from the very first day after the wedding.
In the palace there were great festivities, and the children played at receiving company; but instead of having, as usual, all the cakes and apples that were left, she gave them some sand in a tea-cup, and told them to pretend it was cake.
The week after, she sent little Eliza into the country to a peasant and his wife, and then she told the king so many untrue things about the young princes, that he gave himself no more trouble respecting them.
"Go out into the world and get your own living," said the queen.
"Fly like great birds, who have no voice.
" But she could not make them ugly as she wished, for they were turned into eleven beautiful wild swans.
Then, with a strange cry, they flew through the windows of the palace, over the park, to the forest beyond.
It was early morning when they passed the peasant's cottage, where their sister Eliza lay asleep in her room.
They hovered over the roof, twisted their long necks and flapped their wings, but no one heard them or saw them, so they were at last obliged to fly away, high up in the clouds; and over the wide world they flew till they came to a thick, dark wood, which stretched far away to the seashore.
Poor little Eliza was alone in her room playing with a green leaf, for she had no other playthings, and she pierced a hole through the leaf, and looked through it at the sun, and it was as if she saw her brothers' clear eyes, and when the warm sun shone on her cheeks, she thought of all the kisses they had given her.
One day passed just like another; sometimes the winds rustled through the leaves of the rose-bush, and would whisper to the roses, "Who can be more beautiful than you!
" But the roses would shake their heads, and say, "Eliza is.
" And when the old woman sat at the cottage door on Sunday, and read her hymn-book, the wind would flutter the leaves, and say to the book, "Who can be more pious than you?
" and then the hymn-book would answer "Eliza.
" And the roses and the hymn-book told the real truth.
At fifteen she returned home, but when the queen saw how beautiful she was, she became full of spite and hatred towards her.
Willingly would she have turned her into a swan, like her brothers, but she did not dare to do so yet, because the king wished to see his daughter.
Early one morning the queen went into the bath-room; it was built of marble, and had soft cushions, trimmed with the most beautiful tapestry.
She took three toads with her, and kissed them, and said to one, "When Eliza comes to the bath, seat yourself upon her head, that she may become as stupid as you are.
" Then she said to another, "Place yourself on her forehead, that she may become as ugly as you are, and that her father may not know her.
" "Rest on her heart," she whispered to the third, "then she will have evil inclinations, and suffer in consequence.
" So she put the toads into the clear water, and they turned green immediately.
She next called Eliza, and helped her to undress and get into the bath.
As Eliza dipped her head under the water, one of the toads sat on her hair, a second on her forehead, and a third on her breast, but she did not seem to notice them, and when she rose out of the water, there were three red poppies floating upon it.
Had not the creatures been venomous or been kissed by the witch, they would have been changed into red roses.
At all events they became flowers, because they had rested on Eliza's head, and on her heart.
She was too good and too innocent for witchcraft to have any power over her.
When the wicked queen saw this, she rubbed her face with walnut-juice, so that she was quite brown; then she tangled her beautiful hair and smeared it with disgusting ointment, till it was quite impossible to recognize the beautiful Eliza.
When her father saw her, he was much shocked, and declared she was not his daughter.
No one but the watch-dog and the swallows knew her; and they were only poor animals, and could say nothing.
Then poor Eliza wept, and thought of her eleven brothers, who were all away.
Sorrowfully, she stole away from the palace, and walked, the whole day, over fields and moors, till she came to the great forest.
She knew not in what direction to go; but she was so unhappy, and longed so for her brothers, who had been, like herself, driven out into the world, that she was determined to seek them.
She had been but a short time in the wood when night came on, and she quite lost the path; so she laid herself down on the soft moss, offered up her evening prayer, and leaned her head against the stump of a tree.
All nature was still, and the soft, mild air fanned her forehead.
The light of hundreds of glow-worms shone amidst the grass and the moss, like green fire; and if she touched a twig with her hand, ever so lightly, the brilliant insects fell down around her, like shooting-stars.
All night long she dreamt of her brothers.
She and they were children again, playing together.
She saw them writing with their diamond pencils on golden slates, while she looked at the beautiful picture-book which had cost half a kingdom.
They were not writing lines and letters, as they used to do; but descriptions of the noble deeds they had performed, and of all they had discovered and seen.
In the picture-book, too, everything was living.
The birds sang, and the people came out of the book, and spoke to Eliza and her brothers; but, as the leaves turned over, they darted back again to their places, that all might be in order.
When she awoke, the sun was high in the heavens; yet she could not see him, for the lofty trees spread their branches thickly over her head; but his beams were glancing through the leaves here and there, like a golden mist.
There was a sweet fragrance from the fresh green verdure, and the birds almost perched upon her shoulders.
She heard water rippling from a number of springs, all flowing in a lake with golden sands.
Bushes grew thickly round the lake, and at one spot an opening had been made by a deer, through which Eliza went down to the water.
The lake was so clear that, had not the wind rustled the branches of the trees and the bushes, so that they moved, they would have appeared as if painted in the depths of the lake; for every leaf was reflected in the water, whether it stood in the shade or the sunshine.
As soon as Eliza saw her own face, she was quite terrified at finding it so brown and ugly; but when she wetted her little hand, and rubbed her eyes and forehead, the white skin gleamed forth once more; and, after she had undressed, and dipped herself in the fresh water, a more beautiful king's daughter could not be found in the wide world.
As soon as she had dressed herself again, and braided her long hair, she went to the bubbling spring, and drank some water out of the hollow of her hand.
Then she wandered far into the forest, not knowing whither she went.
She thought of her brothers, and felt sure that God would not forsake her.
It is God who makes the wild apples grow in the wood, to satisfy the hungry, and He now led her to one of these trees, which was so loaded with fruit, that the boughs bent beneath the weight.
Here she held her noonday repast, placed props under the boughs, and then went into the gloomiest depths of the forest.
It was so still that she could hear the sound of her own footsteps, as well as the rustling of every withered leaf which she crushed under her feet.
Not a bird was to be seen, not a sunbeam could penetrate through the large, dark boughs of the trees.
Their lofty trunks stood so close together, that, when she looked before her, it seemed as if she were enclosed within trellis-work.
Such solitude she had never known before.
The night was very dark.
Not a single glow-worm glittered in the moss.
Sorrowfully she laid herself down to sleep; and, after a while, it seemed to her as if the branches of the trees parted over her head, and that the mild eyes of angels looked down upon her from heaven.
When she awoke in the morning, she knew not whether she had dreamt this, or if it had really been so.
Then she continued her wandering; but she had not gone many steps forward, when she met an old woman with berries in her basket, and she gave her a few to eat.
Then Eliza asked her if she had not seen eleven princes riding through the forest.
"No," replied the old woman, "But I saw yesterday eleven swans, with gold crowns on their heads, swimming on the river close by.
" Then she led Eliza a little distance farther to a sloping bank, and at the foot of it wound a little river.
The trees on its banks stretched their long leafy branches across the water towards each other, and where the growth prevented them from meeting naturally, the roots had torn themselves away from the ground, so that the branches might mingle their foliage as they hung over the water.
Eliza bade the old woman farewell, and walked by the flowing river, till she reached the shore of the open sea.
And there, before the young maiden's eyes, lay the glorious ocean, but not a sail appeared on its surface, not even a boat could be seen.
How was she to go farther?
She noticed how the countless pebbles on the sea-shore had been smoothed and rounded by the action of the water.
Glass, iron, stones, everything that lay there mingled together, had taken its shape from the same power, and felt as smooth, or even smoother than her own delicate hand.
"The water rolls on without weariness," she said, "till all that is hard becomes smooth; so will I be unwearied in my task.
Thanks for your lessons, bright rolling waves; my heart tells me you will lead me to my dear brothers.
" On the foam-covered sea-weeds, lay eleven white swan feathers, which she gathered up and placed together.
Drops of water lay upon them; whether they were dew-drops or tears no one could say.
Lonely as it was on the sea-shore, she did not observe it, for the ever-moving sea showed more changes in a few hours than the most varying lake could produce during a whole year.
If a black heavy cloud arose, it was as if the sea said, "I can look dark and angry too;" and then the wind blew, and the waves turned to white foam as they rolled.
When the wind slept, and the clouds glowed with the red sunlight, then the sea looked like a rose leaf.
But however quietly its white glassy surface rested, there was still a motion on the shore, as its waves rose and fell like the breast of a sleeping child.
When the sun was about to set, Eliza saw eleven white swans with golden crowns on their heads, flying towards the land, one behind the other, like a long white ribbon.
Then Eliza went down the slope from the shore, and hid herself behind the bushes.
The swans alighted quite close to her and flapped their great white wings.
As soon as the sun had disappeared under the water, the feathers of the swans fell off, and eleven beautiful princes, Eliza's brothers, stood near her.
She uttered a loud cry, for, although they were very much changed, she knew them immediately.
She sprang into their arms, and called them each by name.
Then, how happy the princes were at meeting their little sister again, for they recognized her, although she had grown so tall and beautiful.
They laughed, and they wept, and very soon understood how wickedly their mother had acted to them all.
"We brothers," said the eldest, "fly about as wild swans, so long as the sun is in the sky; but as soon as it sinks behind the hills, we recover our human shape.
Therefore must we always be near a resting place for our feet before sunset; for if we should be flying towards the clouds at the time we recovered our natural shape as men, we should sink deep into the sea.
We do not dwell here, but in a land just as fair, that lies beyond the ocean, which we have to cross for a long distance; there is no island in our passage upon which we could pass, the night; nothing but a little rock rising out of the sea, upon which we can scarcely stand with safety, even closely crowded together.
If the sea is rough, the foam dashes over us, yet we thank God even for this rock; we have passed whole nights upon it, or we should never have reached our beloved fatherland, for our flight across the sea occupies two of the longest days in the year.
We have permission to visit out home once in every year, and to remain eleven days, during which we fly across the forest to look once more at the palace where our father dwells, and where we were born, and at the church, where our mother lies buried.
Here it seems as if the very trees and bushes were related to us.
The wild horses leap over the plains as we have seen them in our childhood.
The charcoal burners sing the old songs, to which we have danced as children.
This is our fatherland, to which we are drawn by loving ties; and here we have found you, our dear little sister.
Two days longer we can remain here, and then must we fly away to a beautiful land which is not our home; and how can we take you with us?
We have neither ship nor boat.
"
"How can I break this spell?
" said their sister.
And then she talked about it nearly the whole night, only slumbering for a few hours.
Eliza was awakened by the rustling of the swans' wings as they soared above.
Her brothers were again changed to swans, and they flew in circles wider and wider, till they were far away; but one of them, the youngest swan, remained behind, and laid his head in his sister's lap, while she stroked his wings; and they remained together the whole day.
Towards evening, the rest came back, and as the sun went down they resumed their natural forms.
"To-morrow," said one, "we shall fly away, not to return again till a whole year has passed.
But we cannot leave you here.
Have you courage to go with us?
My arm is strong enough to carry you through the wood; and will not all our wings be strong enough to fly with you over the sea?
"
"Yes, take me with you," said Eliza.
Then they spent the whole night in weaving a net with the pliant willow and rushes.
It was very large and strong.
Eliza laid herself down on the net, and when the sun rose, and her brothers again became wild swans, they took up the net with their beaks, and flew up to the clouds with their dear sister, who still slept.
The sunbeams fell on her face, therefore one of the swans soared over her head, so that his broad wings might shade her.
They were far from the land when Eliza woke.
She thought she must still be dreaming, it seemed so strange to her to feel herself being carried so high in the air over the sea.
By her side lay a branch full of beautiful ripe berries, and a bundle of sweet roots; the youngest of her brothers had gathered them for her, and placed them by her side.
She smiled her thanks to him; she knew it was the same who had hovered over her to shade her with his wings.
They were now so high, that a large ship beneath them looked like a white sea-gull skimming the waves.
A great cloud floating behind them appeared like a vast mountain, and upon it Eliza saw her own shadow and those of the eleven swans, looking gigantic in size.
Altogether it formed a more beautiful picture than she had ever seen; but as the sun rose higher, and the clouds were left behind, the shadowy picture vanished away.
Onward the whole day they flew through the air like a winged arrow, yet more slowly than usual, for they had their sister to carry.
The weather seemed inclined to be stormy, and Eliza watched the sinking sun with great anxiety, for the little rock in the ocean was not yet in sight.
It appeared to her as if the swans were making great efforts with their wings.
Alas!
she was the cause of their not advancing more quickly.
When the sun set, they would change to men, fall into the sea and be drowned.
Then she offered a prayer from her inmost heart, but still no appearance of the rock.
Dark clouds came nearer, the gusts of wind told of a coming storm, while from a thick, heavy mass of clouds the lightning burst forth flash after flash.
The sun had reached the edge of the sea, when the swans darted down so swiftly, that Eliza's head trembled; she believed they were falling, but they again soared onward.
Presently she caught sight of the rock just below them, and by this time the sun was half hidden by the waves.
The rock did not appear larger than a seal's head thrust out of the water.
They sunk so rapidly, that at the moment their feet touched the rock, it shone only like a star, and at last disappeared like the last spark in a piece of burnt paper.
Then she saw her brothers standing closely round her with their arms linked together.
There was but just room enough for them, and not the smallest space to spare.
The sea dashed against the rock, and covered them with spray.
The heavens were lighted up with continual flashes, and peal after peal of thunder rolled.
But the sister and brothers sat holding each other's hands, and singing hymns, from which they gained hope and courage.
In the early dawn the air became calm and still, and at sunrise the swans flew away from the rock with Eliza.
The sea was still rough, and from their high position in the air, the white foam on the dark green waves looked like millions of swans swimming on the water.
As the sun rose higher, Eliza saw before her, floating on the air, a range of mountains, with shining masses of ice on their summits.
In the centre, rose a castle apparently a mile long, with rows of columns, rising one above another, while, around it, palm-trees waved and flowers bloomed as large as mill wheels.
She asked if this was the land to which they were hastening.
The swans shook their heads, for what she beheld were the beautiful ever-changing cloud palaces of the "Fata Morgana," into which no mortal can enter.
Eliza was still gazing at the scene, when mountains, forests, and castles melted away, and twenty stately churches rose in their stead, with high towers and pointed gothic windows.
Eliza even fancied she could hear the tones of the organ, but it was the music of the murmuring sea which she heard.
As they drew nearer to the churches, they also changed into a fleet of ships, which seemed to be sailing beneath her; but as she looked again, she found it was only a sea mist gliding over the ocean.
So there continued to pass before her eyes a constant change of scene, till at last she saw the real land to which they were bound, with its blue mountains, its cedar forests, and its cities and palaces.
Long before the sun went down, she sat on a rock, in front of a large cave, on the floor of which the over-grown yet delicate green creeping plants looked like an embroidered carpet.
"Now we shall expect to hear what you dream of to-night," said the youngest brother, as he showed his sister her bedroom.
"Heaven grant that I may dream how to save you," she replied.
And this thought took such hold upon her mind that she prayed earnestly to God for help, and even in her sleep she continued to pray.
Then it appeared to her as if she were flying high in the air, towards the cloudy palace of the "Fata Morgana," and a fairy came out to meet her, radiant and beautiful in appearance, and yet very much like the old woman who had given her berries in the wood, and who had told her of the swans with golden crowns on their heads.
"Your brothers can be released," said she, "if you have only courage and perseverance.
True, water is softer than your own delicate hands, and yet it polishes stones into shapes; it feels no pain as your fingers would feel, it has no soul, and cannot suffer such agony and torment as you will have to endure.
Do you see the stinging nettle which I hold in my hand?
Quantities of the same sort grow round the cave in which you sleep, but none will be of any use to you unless they grow upon the graves in a churchyard.
These you must gather even while they burn blisters on your hands.
Break them to pieces with your hands and feet, and they will become flax, from which you must spin and weave eleven coats with long sleeves; if these are then thrown over the eleven swans, the spell will be broken.
But remember, that from the moment you commence your task until it is finished, even should it occupy years of your life, you must not speak.
The first word you utter will pierce through the hearts of your brothers like a deadly dagger.
Their lives hang upon your tongue.
Remember all I have told you.
" And as she finished speaking, she touched her hand lightly with the nettle, and a pain, as of burning fire, awoke Eliza.
It was broad daylight, and close by where she had been sleeping lay a nettle like the one she had seen in her dream.
She fell on her knees and offered her thanks to God.
Then she went forth from the cave to begin her work with her delicate hands.
She groped in amongst the ugly nettles, which burnt great blisters on her hands and arms, but she determined to bear it gladly if she could only release her dear brothers.
So she bruised the nettles with her bare feet and spun the flax.
At sunset her brothers returned and were very much frightened when they found her dumb.
They believed it to be some new sorcery of their wicked step-mother.
But when they saw her hands they understood what she was doing on their behalf, and the youngest brother wept, and where his tears fell the pain ceased, and the burning blisters vanished.
She kept to her work all night, for she could not rest till she had released her dear brothers.
During the whole of the following day, while her brothers were absent, she sat in solitude, but never before had the time flown so quickly.
One coat was already finished and she had begun the second, when she heard the huntsman's horn, and was struck with fear.
The sound came nearer and nearer, she heard the dogs barking, and fled with terror into the cave.
She hastily bound together the nettles she had gathered into a bundle and sat upon them.
Immediately a great dog came bounding towards her out of the ravine, and then another and another; they barked loudly, ran back, and then came again.
In a very few minutes all the huntsmen stood before the cave, and the handsomest of them was the king of the country.
He advanced towards her, for he had never seen a more beautiful maiden.
"How did you come here, my sweet child?
" he asked.
But Eliza shook her head.
She dared not speak, at the cost of her brothers' lives.
And she hid her hands under her apron, so that the king might not see how she must be suffering.
"Come with me," he said; "here you cannot remain.
If you are as good as you are beautiful, I will dress you in silk and velvet, I will place a golden crown upon your head, and you shall dwell, and rule, and make your home in my richest castle.
" And then he lifted her on his horse.
She wept and wrung her hands, but the king said, "I wish only for your happiness.
A time will come when you will thank me for this.
" And then he galloped away over the mountains, holding her before him on this horse, and the hunters followed behind them.
As the sun went down, they approached a fair royal city, with churches, and cupolas.
On arriving at the castle the king led her into marble halls, where large fountains played, and where the walls and the ceilings were covered with rich paintings.
But she had no eyes for all these glorious sights, she could only mourn and weep.
Patiently she allowed the women to array her in royal robes, to weave pearls in her hair, and draw soft gloves over her blistered fingers.
As she stood before them in all her rich dress, she looked so dazzlingly beautiful that the court bowed low in her presence.
Then the king declared his intention of making her his bride, but the archbishop shook his head, and whispered that the fair young maiden was only a witch who had blinded the king's eyes and bewitched his heart.
But the king would not listen to this; he ordered the music to sound, the daintiest dishes to be served, and the loveliest maidens to dance.
After-wards he led her through fragrant gardens and lofty halls, but not a smile appeared on her lips or sparkled in her eyes.
She looked the very picture of grief.
Then the king opened the door of a little chamber in which she was to sleep; it was adorned with rich green tapestry, and resembled the cave in which he had found her.
On the floor lay the bundle of flax which she had spun from the nettles, and under the ceiling hung the coat she had made.
These things had been brought away from the cave as curiosities by one of the huntsmen.
"Here you can dream yourself back again in the old home in the cave," said the king; "here is the work with which you employed yourself.
It will amuse you now in the midst of all this splendor to think of that time.
"
When Eliza saw all these things which lay so near her heart, a smile played around her mouth, and the crimson blood rushed to her cheeks.
She thought of her brothers, and their release made her so joyful that she kissed the king's hand.
Then he pressed her to his heart.
Very soon the joyous church bells announced the marriage feast, and that the beautiful dumb girl out of the wood was to be made the queen of the country.
Then the archbishop whispered wicked words in the king's ear, but they did not sink into his heart.
The marriage was still to take place, and the archbishop himself had to place the crown on the bride's head; in his wicked spite, he pressed the narrow circlet so tightly on her forehead that it caused her pain.
But a heavier weight encircled her heart - sorrow for her brothers.
She felt not bodily pain.
Her mouth was closed; a single word would cost the lives of her brothers.
But she loved the kind, handsome king, who did everything to make her happy more and more each day; she loved him with all her heart, and her eyes beamed with the love she dared not speak.
Oh!
if she had only been able to confide in him and tell him of her grief.
But dumb she must remain till her task was finished.
Therefore at night she crept away into her little chamber, which had been decked out to look like the cave, and quickly wove one coat after another.
But when she began the seventh she found she had no more flax.
She knew that the nettles she wanted to use grew in the churchyard, and that she must pluck them herself.
How should she get out there?
"Oh, what is the pain in my fingers to the torment which my heart endures?
" said she.
"I must venture, I shall not be denied help from heaven.
" Then with a trembling heart, as if she were about to perform a wicked deed, she crept into the garden in the broad moonlight, and passed through the narrow walks and the deserted streets, till she reached the churchyard.
Then she saw on one of the broad tombstones a group of ghouls.
These hideous creatures took off their rags, as if they intended to bathe, and then clawing open the fresh graves with their long, skinny fingers, pulled out the dead bodies and ate the flesh!
Eliza had to pass close by them, and they fixed their wicked glances upon her, but she prayed silently, gathered the burning nettles, and carried them home with her to the castle.
One person only had seen her, and that was the archbishop - he was awake while everybody was asleep.
Now he thought his opinion was evidently correct.
All was not right with the queen.
She was a witch, and had bewitched the king and all the people.
Secretly he told the king what he had seen and what he feared, and as the hard words came from his tongue, the carved images of the saints shook their heads as if they would say.
"It is not so.
Eliza is innocent.
"
But the archbishop interpreted it in another way; he believed that they witnessed against her, and were shaking their heads at her wickedness.
Two large tears rolled down the king's cheeks, and he went home with doubt in his heart, and at night he pretended to sleep, but there came no real sleep to his eyes, for he saw Eliza get up every night and disappear in her own chamber.
From day to day his brow became darker, and Eliza saw it and did not understand the reason, but it alarmed her and made her heart tremble for her brothers.
Her hot tears glittered like pearls on the regal velvet and diamonds, while all who saw her were wishing they could be queens.
In the mean time she had almost finished her task; only one coat of mail was wanting, but she had no flax left, and not a single nettle.
Once more only, and for the last time, must she venture to the churchyard and pluck a few handfuls.
She thought with terror of the solitary walk, and of the horrible ghouls, but her will was firm, as well as her trust in Providence.
Eliza went, and the king and the archbishop followed her.
They saw her vanish through the wicket gate into the churchyard, and when they came nearer they saw the ghouls sitting on the tombstone, as Eliza had seen them, and the king turned away his head, for he thought she was with them - she whose head had rested on his breast that very evening.
"The people must condemn her," said he, and she was very quickly condemned by every one to suffer death by fire.
Away from the gorgeous regal halls was she led to a dark, dreary cell, where the wind whistled through the iron bars.
Instead of the velvet and silk dresses, they gave her the coats of mail which she had woven to cover her, and the bundle of nettles for a pillow; but nothing they could give her would have pleased her more.
She continued her task with joy, and prayed for help, while the street-boys sang jeering songs about her, and not a soul comforted her with a kind word.
Towards evening, she heard at the grating the flutter of a swan's wing, it was her youngest brother - he had found his sister, and she sobbed for joy, although she knew that very likely this would be the last night she would have to live.
But still she could hope, for her task was almost finished, and her brothers were come.
Then the archbishop arrived, to be with her during her last hours, as he had promised the king.
But she shook her head, and begged him, by looks and gestures, not to stay; for in this night she knew she must finish her task, otherwise all her pain and tears and sleepless nights would have been suffered in vain.
The archbishop withdrew, uttering bitter words against her; but poor Eliza knew that she was innocent, and diligently continued her work.
The little mice ran about the floor, they dragged the nettles to her feet, to help as well as they could; and the thrush sat outside the grating of the window, and sang to her the whole night long, as sweetly as possible, to keep up her spirits.
It was still twilight, and at least an hour before sunrise, when the eleven brothers stood at the castle gate, and demanded to be brought before the king.
They were told it could not be, it was yet almost night, and as the king slept they dared not disturb him.
They threatened, they entreated.
Then the guard appeared, and even the king himself, inquiring what all the noise meant.
At this moment the sun rose.
The eleven brothers were seen no more, but eleven wild swans flew away over the castle.
And now all the people came streaming forth from the gates of the city, to see the witch burnt.
An old horse drew the cart on which she sat.
They had dressed her in a garment of coarse sackcloth.
Her lovely hair hung loose on her shoulders, her cheeks were deadly pale, her lips moved silently, while her fingers still worked at the green flax.
Even on the way to death, she would not give up her task.
The ten coats of mail lay at her feet, she was working hard at the eleventh, while the mob jeered her and said, "See the witch, how she mutters!
She has no hymn-book in her hand.
She sits there with her ugly sorcery.
Let us tear it in a thousand pieces.
"
And then they pressed towards her, and would have destroyed the coats of mail, but at the same moment eleven wild swans flew over her, and alighted on the cart.
Then they flapped their large wings, and the crowd drew on one side in alarm.
"It is a sign from heaven that she is innocent," whispered many of them; but they ventured not to say it aloud.
As the executioner seized her by the hand, to lift her out of the cart, she hastily threw the eleven coats of mail over the swans, and they immediately became eleven handsome princes; but the youngest had a swan's wing, instead of an arm; for she had not been able to finish the last sleeve of the coat.
"Now I may speak," she exclaimed.
"I am innocent.
"
Then the people, who saw what happened, bowed to her, as before a saint; but she sank lifeless in her brothers' arms, overcome with suspense, anguish, and pain.
"Yes, she is innocent," said the eldest brother; and then he related all that had taken place; and while he spoke there rose in the air a fragrance as from millions of roses.
Every piece of faggot in the pile had taken root, and threw out branches, and appeared a thick hedge, large and high, covered with roses; while above all bloomed a white and shining flower, that glittered like a star.
This flower the king plucked, and placed in Eliza's bosom, when she awoke from her swoon, with peace and happiness in her heart.
And all the church bells rang of themselves, and the birds came in great troops.
And a marriage procession returned to the castle, such as no king had ever before seen.
Now then, let us begin.
When we are at the end of the story, we shall know more than we know now: but to begin.
Once upon a time there was a wicked sprite, indeed he was the most mischievous of all sprites.
One day he was in a very good humor, for he had made a mirror with the power of causing all that was good and beautiful when it was reflected therein, to look poor and mean; but that which was good-for-nothing and looked ugly was shown magnified and increased in ugliness.
In this mirror the most beautiful landscapes looked like boiled spinach, and the best persons were turned into frights, or appeared to stand on their heads; their faces were so distorted that they were not to be recognised; and if anyone had a mole, you might be sure that it would be magnified and spread over both nose and mouth.
"That's glorious fun!
" said the sprite.
If a good thought passed through a man's mind, then a grin was seen in the mirror, and the sprite laughed heartily at his clever discovery.
All the little sprites who went to his school - for he kept a sprite school - told each other that a miracle had happened; and that now only, as they thought, it would be possible to see how the world really looked.
They ran about with the mirror; and at last there was not a land or a person who was not represented distorted in the mirror.
So then they thought they would fly up to the sky, and have a joke there.
The higher they flew with the mirror, the more terribly it grinned: they could hardly hold it fast.
Higher and higher still they flew, nearer and nearer to the stars, when suddenly the mirror shook so terribly with grinning, that it flew out of their hands and fell to the earth, where it was dashed in a hundred million and more pieces.
And now it worked much more evil than before; for some of these pieces were hardly so large as a grain of sand, and they flew about in the wide world, and when they got into people's eyes, there they stayed; and then people saw everything perverted, or only had an eye for that which was evil.
This happened because the very smallest bit had the same power which the whole mirror had possessed.
Some persons even got a splinter in their heart, and then it made one shudder, for their heart became like a lump of ice.
Some of the broken pieces were so large that they were used for windowpanes, through which one could not see one's friends.
Other pieces were put in spectacles; and that was a sad affair when people put on their glasses to see well and rightly.
Then the wicked sprite laughed till he almost choked, for all this tickled his fancy.
The fine splinters still flew about in the air: and now we shall hear what happened next.
In a large town, where there are so many houses, and so many people, that there is no roof left for everybody to have a little garden; and where, on this account, most persons are obliged to content themselves with flowers in pots; there lived two little children, who had a garden somewhat larger than a flower-pot.
They were not brother and sister; but they cared for each other as much as if they were.
Their parents lived exactly opposite.
They inhabited two garrets; and where the roof of the one house joined that of the other, and the gutter ran along the extreme end of it, there was to each house a small window: one needed only to step over the gutter to get from one window to the other.
The children's parents had large wooden boxes there, in which vegetables for the kitchen were planted, and little rosetrees besides: there was a rose in each box, and they grew splendidly.
They now thought of placing the boxes across the gutter, so that they nearly reached from one window to the other, and looked just like two walls of flowers.
The tendrils of the peas hung down over the boxes; and the rose-trees shot up long branches, twined round the windows, and then bent towards each other: it was almost like a triumphant arch of foliage and flowers.
The boxes were very high, and the children knew that they must not creep over them; so they often obtained permission to get out of the windows to each other, and to sit on their little stools among the roses, where they could play delightfully.
In winter there was an end of this pleasure.
The windows were often frozen over; but then they heated copper farthings on the stove, and laid the hot farthing on the windowpane, and then they had a capital peep-hole, quite nicely rounded; and out of each peeped a gentle friendly eye - it was the little boy and the little girl who were looking out.
His name was Kay, hers was Gerda.
In summer, with one jump, they could get to each other; but in winter they were obliged first to go down the long stairs, and then up the long stairs again: and out-of-doors there was quite a snow-storm.
"It is the white bees that are swarming," said Kay's old grandmother.
"Do the white bees choose a queen?
" asked the little boy; for he knew that the honey-bees always have one.
"Yes," said the grandmother, "she flies where the swarm hangs in the thickest clusters.
She is the largest of all; and she can never remain quietly on the earth, but goes up again into the black clouds.
Many a winter's night she flies through the streets of the town, and peeps in at the windows; and they then freeze in so wondrous a manner that they look like flowers.
"
"Yes, I have seen it," said both the children; and so they knew that it was true.
"Can the Snow Queen come in?
" said the little girl.
"Only let her come in!
" said the little boy.
"Then I'd put her on the stove, and she'd melt.
"
And then his grandmother patted his head and told him other stories.
In the evening, when little Kay was at home, and half undressed, he climbed up on the chair by the window, and peeped out of the little hole.
A few snow-flakes were falling, and one, the largest of all, remained lying on the edge of a flower-pot.
The flake of snow grew larger and larger; and at last it was like a young lady, dressed in the finest white gauze, made of a million little flakes like stars.
She was so beautiful and delicate, but she was of ice, of dazzling, sparkling ice; yet she lived; her eyes gazed fixedly, like two stars; but there was neither quiet nor repose in them.
She nodded towards the window, and beckoned with her hand.
The little boy was frightened, and jumped down from the chair; it seemed to him as if, at the same moment, a large bird flew past the window.
The next day it was a sharp frost - and then the spring came; the sun shone, the green leaves appeared, the swallows built their nests, the windows were opened, and the little children again sat in their pretty garden, high up on the leads at the top of the house.
That summer the roses flowered in unwonted beauty.
The little girl had learned a hymn, in which there was something about roses; and then she thought of her own flowers; and she sang the verse to the little boy, who then sang it with her:
"The rose in the valley is blooming so sweet,
And angels descend there the children to greet.
"
And the children held each other by the hand, kissed the roses, looked up at the clear sunshine, and spoke as though they really saw angels there.
What lovely summer-days those were!
How delightful to be out in the air, near the fresh rose-bushes, that seem as if they would never finish blossoming!
Kay and Gerda looked at the picture-book full of beasts and of birds; and it was then - the clock in the church-tower was just striking five - that Kay said, "Oh!
I feel such a sharp pain in my heart; and now something has got into my eye!
"
The little girl put her arms around his neck.
He winked his eyes; now there was nothing to be seen.
"I think it is out now," said he; but it was not.
It was just one of those pieces of glass from the magic mirror that had got into his eye; and poor Kay had got another piece right in his heart.
It will soon become like ice.
It did not hurt any longer, but there it was.
"What are you crying for?
" asked he.
"You look so ugly!
There's nothing the matter with me.
Ah," said he at once, "that rose is cankered!
And look, this one is quite crooked!
After all, these roses are very ugly!
They are just like the box they are planted in!
" And then he gave the box a good kick with his foot, and pulled both the roses up.
"What are you doing?
" cried the little girl; and as he perceived her fright, he pulled up another rose, got in at the window, and hastened off from dear little Gerda.
Afterwards, when she brought her picture-book, he asked, "What horrid beasts have you there?
" And if his grandmother told them stories, he always interrupted her; besides, if he could manage it, he would get behind her, put on her spectacles, and imitate her way of speaking; he copied all her ways, and then everybody laughed at him.
He was soon able to imitate the gait and manner of everyone in the street.
Everything that was peculiar and displeasing in them - that Kay knew how to imitate: and at such times all the people said, "The boy is certainly very clever!
" But it was the glass he had got in his eye; the glass that was sticking in his heart, which made him tease even little Gerda, whose whole soul was devoted to him.
His games now were quite different to what they had formerly been, they were so very knowing.
One winter's day, when the flakes of snow were flying about, he spread the skirts of his blue coat, and caught the snow as it fell.
"Look through this glass, Gerda," said he.
And every flake seemed larger, and appeared like a magnificent flower, or beautiful star; it was splendid to look at!
"Look, how clever!
" said Kay.
"That's much more interesting than real flowers!
They are as exact as possible; there is not a fault in them, if they did not melt!
"
It was not long after this, that Kay came one day with large gloves on, and his little sledge at his back, and bawled right into Gerda's ears, "I have permission to go out into the square where the others are playing"; and off he was in a moment.
There, in the market-place, some of the boldest of the boys used to tie their sledges to the carts as they passed by, and so they were pulled along, and got a good ride.
It was so capital!
Just as they were in the very height of their amusement, a large sledge passed by: it was painted quite white, and there was someone in it wrapped up in a rough white mantle of fur, with a rough white fur cap on his head.
The sledge drove round the square twice, and Kay tied on his sledge as quickly as he could, and off he drove with it.
On they went quicker and quicker into the next street; and the person who drove turned round to Kay, and nodded to him in a friendly manner, just as if they knew each other.
Every time he was going to untie his sledge, the person nodded to him, and then Kay sat quiet; and so on they went till they came outside the gates of the town.
Then the snow began to fall so thickly that the little boy could not see an arm's length before him, but still on he went: when suddenly he let go the string he held in his hand in order to get loose from the sledge, but it was of no use; still the little vehicle rushed on with the quickness of the wind.
He then cried as loud as he could, but no one heard him; the snow drifted and the sledge flew on, and sometimes it gave a jerk as though they were driving over hedges and ditches.
He was quite frightened, and he tried to repeat the Lord's Prayer; but all he could do, he was only able to remember the multiplication table.
The snow-flakes grew larger and larger, till at last they looked just like great white fowls.
Suddenly they flew on one side; the large sledge stopped, and the person who drove rose up.
It was a lady; her cloak and cap were of snow.
She was tall and of slender figure, and of a dazzling whiteness.
It was the Snow Queen.
"We have travelled fast," said she; "but it is freezingly cold.
Come under my bearskin.
" And she put him in the sledge beside her, wrapped the fur round him, and he felt as though he were sinking in a snow-wreath.
"Are you still cold?
" asked she; and then she kissed his forehead.
Ah!
it was colder than ice; it penetrated to his very heart, which was already almost a frozen lump; it seemed to him as if he were about to die - but a moment more and it was quite congenial to him, and he did not remark the cold that was around him.
"My sledge!
Do not forget my sledge!
" It was the first thing he thought of.
It was there tied to one of the white chickens, who flew along with it on his back behind the large sledge.
The Snow Queen kissed Kay once more, and then he forgot little Gerda, grandmother, and all whom he had left at his home.
"Now you will have no more kisses," said she, "or else I should kiss you to death!
"
Kay looked at her.
She was very beautiful; a more clever, or a more lovely countenance he could not fancy to himself; and she no longer appeared of ice as before, when she sat outside the window, and beckoned to him; in his eyes she was perfect, he did not fear her at all, and told her that he could calculate in his head and with fractions, even; that he knew the number of square miles there were in the different countries, and how many inhabitants they contained; and she smiled while he spoke.
It then seemed to him as if what he knew was not enough, and he looked upwards in the large huge empty space above him, and on she flew with him; flew high over the black clouds, while the storm moaned and whistled as though it were singing some old tune.
On they flew over woods and lakes, over seas, and many lands; and beneath them the chilling storm rushed fast, the wolves howled, the snow crackled; above them flew large screaming crows, but higher up appeared the moon, quite large and bright; and it was on it that Kay gazed during the long long winter's night; while by day he slept at the feet of the Snow Queen.
But what became of little Gerda when Kay did not return?
Where could he be?
Nobody knew; nobody could give any intelligence.
All the boys knew was, that they had seen him tie his sledge to another large and splendid one, which drove down the street and out of the town.
Nobody knew where he was; many sad tears were shed, and little Gerda wept long and bitterly; at last she said he must be dead; that he had been drowned in the river which flowed close to the town.
Oh!
those were very long and dismal winter evenings!
At last spring came, with its warm sunshine.
"Kay is dead and gone!
" said little Gerda.
"That I don't believe," said the Sunshine.
"Kay is dead and gone!
" said she to the Swallows.
"That I don't believe," said they: and at last little Gerda did not think so any longer either.
"I'll put on my red shoes," said she, one morning; "Kay has never seen them, and then I'll go down to the river and ask there.
"
It was quite early; she kissed her old grandmother, who was still asleep, put on her red shoes, and went alone to the river.
"Is it true that you have taken my little playfellow?
I will make you a present of my red shoes, if you will give him back to me.
"
And, as it seemed to her, the blue waves nodded in a strange manner; then she took off her red shoes, the most precious things she possessed, and threw them both into the river.
But they fell close to the bank, and the little waves bore them immediately to land; it was as if the stream would not take what was dearest to her; for in reality it had not got little Kay; but Gerda thought that she had not thrown the shoes out far enough, so she clambered into a boat which lay among the rushes, went to the farthest end, and threw out the shoes.
But the boat was not fastened, and the motion which she occasioned, made it drift from the shore.
She observed this, and hastened to get back; but before she could do so, the boat was more than a yard from the land, and was gliding quickly onward.
Little Gerda was very frightened, and began to cry; but no one heard her except the sparrows, and they could not carry her to land; but they flew along the bank, and sang as if to comfort her, "Here we are!
Here we are!
" The boat drifted with the stream, little Gerda sat quite still without shoes, for they were swimming behind the boat, but she could not reach them, because the boat went much faster than they did.
The banks on both sides were beautiful; lovely flowers, venerable trees, and slopes with sheep and cows, but not a human being was to be seen.
"Perhaps the river will carry me to little Kay," said she; and then she grew less sad.
She rose, and looked for many hours at the beautiful green banks.
Presently she sailed by a large cherry-orchard, where was a little cottage with curious red and blue windows; it was thatched, and before it two wooden soldiers stood sentry, and presented arms when anyone went past.
Gerda called to them, for she thought they were alive; but they, of course, did not answer.
She came close to them, for the stream drifted the boat quite near the land.
Gerda called still louder, and an old woman then came out of the cottage, leaning upon a crooked stick.
She had a large broad-brimmed hat on, painted with the most splendid flowers.
"Poor little child!
" said the old woman.
"How did you get upon the large rapid river, to be driven about so in the wide world!
" And then the old woman went into the water, caught hold of the boat with her crooked stick, drew it to the bank, and lifted little Gerda out.
And Gerda was so glad to be on dry land again; but she was rather afraid of the strange old woman.
"But come and tell me who you are, and how you came here," said she.
And Gerda told her all; and the old woman shook her head and said, "A-hem!
a-hem!
" and when Gerda had told her everything, and asked her if she had not seen little Kay, the woman answered that he had not passed there, but he no doubt would come; and she told her not to be cast down, but taste her cherries, and look at her flowers, which were finer than any in a picture-book, each of which could tell a whole story.
She then took Gerda by the hand, led her into the little cottage, and locked the door.
The windows were very high up; the glass was red, blue, and green, and the sunlight shone through quite wondrously in all sorts of colors.
On the table stood the most exquisite cherries, and Gerda ate as many as she chose, for she had permission to do so.
While she was eating, the old woman combed her hair with a golden comb, and her hair curled and shone with a lovely golden color around that sweet little face, which was so round and so like a rose.
"I have often longed for such a dear little girl," said the old woman.
"Now you shall see how well we agree together"; and while she combed little Gerda's hair, the child forgot her foster-brother Kay more and more, for the old woman understood magic; but she was no evil being, she only practised witchcraft a little for her own private amusement, and now she wanted very much to keep little Gerda.
She therefore went out in the garden, stretched out her crooked stick towards the rose-bushes, which, beautifully as they were blowing, all sank into the earth and no one could tell where they had stood.
The old woman feared that if Gerda should see the roses, she would then think of her own, would remember little Kay, and run away from her.
She now led Gerda into the flower-garden.
Oh, what odour and what loveliness was there!
Every flower that one could think of, and of every season, stood there in fullest bloom; no picture-book could be gayer or more beautiful.
Gerda jumped for joy, and played till the sun set behind the tall cherry-tree; she then had a pretty bed, with a red silken coverlet filled with blue violets.
She fell asleep, and had as pleasant dreams as ever a queen on her wedding-day.
The next morning she went to play with the flowers in the warm sunshine, and thus passed away a day.
Gerda knew every flower; and, numerous as they were, it still seemed to Gerda that one was wanting, though she did not know which.
One day while she was looking at the hat of the old woman painted with flowers, the most beautiful of them all seemed to her to be a rose.
The old woman had forgotten to take it from her hat when she made the others vanish in the earth.
But so it is when one's thoughts are not collected.
"What!
" said Gerda.
"Are there no roses here?
" and she ran about amongst the flowerbeds, and looked, and looked, but there was not one to be found.
She then sat down and wept; but her hot tears fell just where a rose-bush had sunk; and when her warm tears watered the ground, the tree shot up suddenly as fresh and blooming as when it had been swallowed up.
Gerda kissed the roses, thought of her own dear roses at home, and with them of little Kay.
"Oh, how long I have stayed!
" said the little girl.
"I intended to look for Kay!
Don't you know where he is?
" she asked of the roses.
"Do you think he is dead and gone?
"
"Dead he certainly is not," said the Roses.
"We have been in the earth where all the dead are, but Kay was not there.
"
"Many thanks!
" said little Gerda; and she went to the other flowers, looked into their cups, and asked, "Don't you know where little Kay is?
"
But every flower stood in the sunshine, and dreamed its own fairy tale or its own story: and they all told her very many things, but not one knew anything of Kay.
Well, what did the Tiger-Lily say?
"Hearest thou not the drum?
Bum!
Bum!
Those are the only two tones.
Always bum!
Bum!
Hark to the plaintive song of the old woman, to the call of the priests!
The Hindoo woman in her long robe stands upon the funeral pile; the flames rise around her and her dead husband, but the Hindoo woman thinks on the living one in the surrounding circle; on him whose eyes burn hotter than the flames - on him, the fire of whose eyes pierces her heart more than the flames which soon will burn her body to ashes.
Can the heart's flame die in the flame of the funeral pile?
"
"I don't understand that at all," said little Gerda.
"That is my story," said the Lily.
What did the Convolvulus say?
"Projecting over a narrow mountain-path there hangs an old feudal castle.
Thick evergreens grow on the dilapidated walls, and around the altar, where a lovely maiden is standing: she bends over the railing and looks out upon the rose.
No fresher rose hangs on the branches than she; no appleblossom carried away by the wind is more buoyant!
How her silken robe is rustling!
"'Is he not yet come?
'"
"Is it Kay that you mean?
" asked little Gerda.
"I am speaking about my story - about my dream," answered the Convolvulus.
What did the Snowdrops say?
"Between the trees a long board is hanging - it is a swing.
Two little girls are sitting in it, and swing themselves backwards and forwards; their frocks are as white as snow, and long green silk ribands flutter from their bonnets.
Their brother, who is older than they are, stands up in the swing; he twines his arms round the cords to hold himself fast, for in one hand he has a little cup, and in the other a clay-pipe.
He is blowing soap-bubbles.
The swing moves, and the bubbles float in charming changing colors: the last is still hanging to the end of the pipe, and rocks in the breeze.
The swing moves.
The little black dog, as light as a soap-bubble, jumps up on his hind legs to try to get into the swing.
It moves, the dog falls down, barks, and is angry.
They tease him; the bubble bursts!
A swing, a bursting bubble - such is my song!
"
"What you relate may be very pretty, but you tell it in so melancholy a manner, and do not mention Kay.
"
What do the Hyacinths say?
"There were once upon a time three sisters, quite transparent, and very beautiful.
The robe of the one was red, that of the second blue, and that of the third white.
They danced hand in hand beside the calm lake in the clear moonshine.
They were not elfin maidens, but mortal children.
A sweet fragrance was smelt, and the maidens vanished in the wood; the fragrance grew stronger - three coffins, and in them three lovely maidens, glided out of the forest and across the lake: the shining glow-worms flew around like little floating lights.
Do the dancing maidens sleep, or are they dead?
The odour of the flowers says they are corpses; the evening bell tolls for the dead!
"
"You make me quite sad," said little Gerda.
"I cannot help thinking of the dead maidens.
Oh!
is little Kay really dead?
The Roses have been in the earth, and they say no.
"
"Ding, dong!
" sounded the Hyacinth bells.
"We do not toll for little Kay; we do not know him.
That is our way of singing, the only one we have.
"
And Gerda went to the Ranunculuses, that looked forth from among the shining green leaves.
"You are a little bright sun!
" said Gerda.
"Tell me if you know where I can find my playfellow.
"
And the Ranunculus shone brightly, and looked again at Gerda.
What song could the Ranunculus sing?
It was one that said nothing about Kay either.
"In a small court the bright sun was shining in the first days of spring.
The beams glided down the white walls of a neighbor's house, and close by the fresh yellow flowers were growing, shining like gold in the warm sun-rays.
An old grandmother was sitting in the air; her grand-daughter, the poor and lovely servant just come for a short visit.
She knows her grandmother.
There was gold, pure virgin gold in that blessed kiss.
There, that is my little story," said the Ranunculus.
"My poor old grandmother!
" sighed Gerda.
"Yes, she is longing for me, no doubt: she is sorrowing for me, as she did for little Kay.
But I will soon come home, and then I will bring Kay with me.
It is of no use asking the flowers; they only know their own old rhymes, and can tell me nothing.
" And she tucked up her frock, to enable her to run quicker; but the Narcissus gave her a knock on the leg, just as she was going to jump over it.
So she stood still, looked at the long yellow flower, and asked, "You perhaps know something?
" and she bent down to the Narcissus.
And what did it say?
"I can see myself - I can see myself!
Oh, how odorous I am!
Up in the little garret there stands, half-dressed, a little Dancer.
She stands now on one leg, now on both; she despises the whole world; yet she lives only in imagination.
She pours water out of the teapot over a piece of stuff which she holds in her hand; it is the bodice; cleanliness is a fine thing.
The white dress is hanging on the hook; it was washed in the teapot, and dried on the roof.
She puts it on, ties a saffron-colored kerchief round her neck, and then the gown looks whiter.
I can see myself - I can see myself!
"
"That's nothing to me," said little Gerda.
"That does not concern me.
" And then off she ran to the further end of the garden.
The gate was locked, but she shook the rusted bolt till it was loosened, and the gate opened; and little Gerda ran off barefooted into the wide world.
She looked round her thrice, but no one followed her.
At last she could run no longer; she sat down on a large stone, and when she looked about her, she saw that the summer had passed; it was late in the autumn, but that one could not remark in the beautiful garden, where there was always sunshine, and where there were flowers the whole year round.
"Dear me, how long I have staid!
" said Gerda.
"Autumn is come.
I must not rest any longer.
" And she got up to go further.
Oh, how tender and wearied her little feet were!
All around it looked so cold and raw: the long willow-leaves were quite yellow, and the fog dripped from them like water; one leaf fell after the other: the sloes only stood full of fruit, which set one's teeth on edge.
Oh, how dark and comfortless it was in the dreary world!
Gerda was obliged to rest herself again, when, exactly opposite to her, a large Raven came hopping over the white snow.
He had long been looking at Gerda and shaking his head; and now he said, "Caw!
Caw!
" Good day!
Good day!
He could not say it better; but he felt a sympathy for the little girl, and asked her where she was going all alone.
The word "alone" Gerda understood quite well, and felt how much was expressed by it; so she told the Raven her whole history, and asked if he had not seen Kay.
The Raven nodded very gravely, and said, "It may be - it may be!
"
"What, do you really think so?
" cried the little girl; and she nearly squeezed the Raven to death, so much did she kiss him.
"Gently, gently," said the Raven.
"I think I know; I think that it may be little Kay.
But now he has forgotten you for the Princess.
"
"Does he live with a Princess?
" asked Gerda.
"Yes - listen," said the Raven; "but it will be difficult for me to speak your language.
If you understand the Raven language I can tell you better.
"
"No, I have not learnt it," said Gerda; "but my grandmother understands it, and she can speak gibberish too.
I wish I had learnt it.
"
"No matter," said the Raven; "I will tell you as well as I can; however, it will be bad enough.
" And then he told all he knew.
"In the kingdom where we now are there lives a Princess, who is extraordinarily clever; for she has read all the newspapers in the whole world, and has forgotten them again - so clever is she.
She was lately, it is said, sitting on her throne - which is not very amusing after all - when she began humming an old tune, and it was just, 'Oh, why should I not be married?
' 'That song is not without its meaning,' said she, and so then she was determined to marry; but she would have a husband who knew how to give an answer when he was spoken to - not one who looked only as if he were a great personage, for that is so tiresome.
She then had all the ladies of the court drummed together; and when they heard her intention, all were very pleased, and said, 'We are very glad to hear it; it is the very thing we were thinking of.
' You may believe every word I say," said the Raven; "for I have a tame sweetheart that hops about in the palace quite free, and it was she who told me all this.
"The newspapers appeared forthwith with a border of hearts and the initials of the Princess; and therein you might read that every good-looking young man was at liberty to come to the palace and speak to the Princess; and he who spoke in such wise as showed he felt himself at home there, that one the Princess would choose for her husband.
"Yes, Yes," said the Raven, "you may believe it; it is as true as I am sitting here.
People came in crowds; there was a crush and a hurry, but no one was successful either on the first or second day.
They could all talk well enough when they were out in the street; but as soon as they came inside the palace gates, and saw the guard richly dressed in silver, and the lackeys in gold on the staircase, and the large illuminated saloons, then they were abashed; and when they stood before the throne on which the Princess was sitting, all they could do was to repeat the last word they had uttered, and to hear it again did not interest her very much.
It was just as if the people within were under a charm, and had fallen into a trance till they came out again into the street; for then - oh, then - they could chatter enough.
There was a whole row of them standing from the town-gates to the palace.
I was there myself to look," said the Raven.
"They grew hungry and thirsty; but from the palace they got nothing whatever, not even a glass of water.
Some of the cleverest, it is true, had taken bread and butter with them: but none shared it with his neighbor, for each thought, 'Let him look hungry, and then the Princess won't have him.
'"
"But Kay - little Kay," said Gerda, "when did he come?
Was he among the number?
"
"Patience, patience; we are just come to him.
It was on the third day when a little personage without horse or equipage, came marching right boldly up to the palace; his eyes shone like yours, he had beautiful long hair, but his clothes were very shabby.
"
"That was Kay," cried Gerda, with a voice of delight.
"Oh, now I've found him!
" and she clapped her hands for joy.
"He had a little knapsack at his back," said the Raven.
"No, that was certainly his sledge," said Gerda; "for when he went away he took his sledge with him.
"
"That may be," said the Raven; "I did not examine him so minutely; but I know from my tame sweetheart, that when he came into the court-yard of the palace, and saw the body-guard in silver, the lackeys on the staircase, he was not the least abashed; he nodded, and said to them, 'It must be very tiresome to stand on the stairs; for my part, I shall go in.
' The saloons were gleaming with lustres - privy councillors and excellencies were walking about barefooted, and wore gold keys; it was enough to make any one feel uncomfortable.
His boots creaked, too, so loudly, but still he was not at all afraid.
"
"That's Kay for certain," said Gerda.
"I know he had on new boots; I have heard them creaking in grandmama's room.
"
"Yes, they creaked," said the Raven.
"And on he went boldly up to the Princess, who was sitting on a pearl as large as a spinning-wheel.
All the ladies of the court, with their attendants and attendants' attendants, and all the cavaliers, with their gentlemen and gentlemen's gentlemen, stood round; and the nearer they stood to the door, the prouder they looked.
It was hardly possible to look at the gentleman's gentleman, so very haughtily did he stand in the doorway.
"
"It must have been terrible," said little Gerda.
"And did Kay get the Princess?
"
"Were I not a Raven, I should have taken the Princess myself, although I am promised.
It is said he spoke as well as I speak when I talk Raven language; this I learned from my tame sweetheart.
He was bold and nicely behaved; he had not come to woo the Princess, but only to hear her wisdom.
She pleased him, and he pleased her.
"
"Yes, yes; for certain that was Kay," said Gerda.
"He was so clever; he could reckon fractions in his head.
Oh, won't you take me to the palace?
"
"That is very easily said," answered the Raven.
"But how are we to manage it?
I'll speak to my tame sweetheart about it: she must advise us; for so much I must tell you, such a little girl as you are will never get permission to enter.
"
"Oh, yes I shall," said Gerda; "when Kay hears that I am here, he will come out directly to fetch me.
"
"Wait for me here on these steps," said the Raven.
He moved his head backwards and forwards and flew away.
The evening was closing in when the Raven returned.
"Caw - caw!
" said he.
"She sends you her compliments; and here is a roll for you.
She took it out of the kitchen, where there is bread enough.
You are hungry, no doubt.
It is not possible for you to enter the palace, for you are barefooted: the guards in silver, and the lackeys in gold, would not allow it; but do not cry, you shall come in still.
My sweetheart knows a little back stair that leads to the bedchamber, and she knows where she can get the key of it.
"
And they went into the garden in the large avenue, where one leaf was falling after the other; and when the lights in the palace had all gradually disappeared, the Raven led little Gerda to the back door, which stood half open.
Oh, how Gerda's heart beat with anxiety and longing!
It was just as if she had been about to do something wrong; and yet she only wanted to know if little Kay was there.
Yes, he must be there.
She called to mind his intelligent eyes, and his long hair, so vividly, she could quite see him as he used to laugh when they were sitting under the roses at home.
"He will, no doubt, be glad to see you - to hear what a long way you have come for his sake; to know how unhappy all at home were when he did not come back.
"
Oh, what a fright and a joy it was!
They were now on the stairs.
A single lamp was burning there; and on the floor stood the tame Raven, turning her head on every side and looking at Gerda, who bowed as her grandmother had taught her to do.
"My intended has told me so much good of you, my dear young lady," said the tame Raven.
"Your tale is very affecting.
If you will take the lamp, I will go before.
We will go straight on, for we shall meet no one.
"
"I think there is somebody just behind us," said Gerda; and something rushed past: it was like shadowy figures on the wall; horses with flowing manes and thin legs, huntsmen, ladies and gentlemen on horseback.
"They are only dreams," said the Raven.
"They come to fetch the thoughts of the high personages to the chase; 'tis well, for now you can observe them in bed all the better.
But let me find, when you enjoy honor and distinction, that you possess a grateful heart.
"
"Tut!
That's not worth talking about," said the Raven of the woods.
They now entered the first saloon, which was of rose-colored satin, with artificial flowers on the wall.
Here the dreams were rushing past, but they hastened by so quickly that Gerda could not see the high personages.
One hall was more magnificent than the other; one might indeed well be abashed; and at last they came into the bedchamber.
The ceiling of the room resembled a large palm-tree with leaves of glass, of costly glass; and in the middle, from a thick golden stem, hung two beds, each of which resembled a lily.
One was white, and in this lay the Princess; the other was red, and it was here that Gerda was to look for little Kay.
She bent back one of the red leaves, and saw a brown neck.
Oh!
that was Kay!
She called him quite loud by name, held the lamp towards him - the dreams rushed back again into the chamber - he awoke, turned his head, and - it was not little Kay!
The Prince was only like him about the neck; but he was young and handsome.
And out of the white lily leaves the Princess peeped, too, and asked what was the matter.
Then little Gerda cried, and told her her whole history, and all that the Ravens had done for her.
"Poor little thing!
" said the Prince and the Princess.
They praised the Ravens very much, and told them they were not at all angry with them, but they were not to do so again.
However, they should have a reward.
"Will you fly about here at liberty," asked the Princess; "or would you like to have a fixed appointment as court ravens, with all the broken bits from the kitchen?
"
And both the Ravens nodded, and begged for a fixed appointment; for they thought of their old age, and said, "It is a good thing to have a provision for our old days.
"
And the Prince got up and let Gerda sleep in his bed, and more than this he could not do.
She folded her little hands and thought, "How good men and animals are! "
and she then fell asleep and slept soundly.
All the dreams flew in again, and they now looked like the angels; they drew a little sledge, in which little Kay sat and nodded his head; but the whole was only a dream, and therefore it all vanished as soon as she awoke.
The next day she was dressed from head to foot in silk and velvet.
They offered to let her stay at the palace, and lead a happy life; but she begged to have a little carriage with a horse in front, and for a small pair of shoes; then, she said, she would again go forth in the wide world and look for Kay.
Shoes and a muff were given her; she was, too, dressed very nicely; and when she was about to set off, a new carriage stopped before the door.
It was of pure gold, and the arms of the Prince and Princess shone like a star upon it; the coachman, the footmen, and the outriders, for outriders were there, too, all wore golden crowns.
The Prince and the Princess assisted her into the carriage themselves, and wished her all success.
The Raven of the woods, who was now married, accompanied her for the first three miles.
He sat beside Gerda, for he could not bear riding backwards; the other Raven stood in the doorway, and flapped her wings; she could not accompany Gerda, because she suffered from headache since she had had a fixed appointment and ate so much.
The carriage was lined inside with sugar-plums, and in the seats were fruits and gingerbread.
"Farewell!
Farewell! "
cried Prince and Princess; and Gerda wept, and the Raven wept.
Thus passed the first miles; and then the Raven bade her farewell, and this was the most painful separation of all.
He flew into a tree, and beat his black wings as long as he could see the carriage, that shone from afar like a sunbeam.
They drove through the dark wood; but the carriage shone like a torch, and it dazzled the eyes of the robbers, so that they could not bear to look at it.
"'Tis gold!
'Tis gold!
" they cried; and they rushed forward, seized the horses, knocked down the little postilion, the coachman, and the servants, and pulled little Gerda out of the carriage.
"How plump, how beautiful she is!
She must have been fed on nut-kernels," said the old female robber, who had a long, scrubby beard, and bushy eyebrows that hung down over her eyes.
"She is as good as a fatted lamb!
How nice she will be!
" And then she drew out a knife, the blade of which shone so that it was quite dreadful to behold.
"Oh!
" cried the woman at the same moment.
She had been bitten in the ear by her own little daughter, who hung at her back; and who was so wild and unmanageable, that it was quite amusing to see her.
"You naughty child!
" said the mother: and now she had not time to kill Gerda.
"She shall play with me," said the little robber child.
"She shall give me her muff, and her pretty frock; she shall sleep in my bed!
" And then she gave her mother another bite, so that she jumped, and ran round with the pain; and the Robbers laughed, and said, "Look, how she is dancing with the little one!
"
"I will go into the carriage," said the little robber maiden; and she would have her will, for she was very spoiled and very headstrong.
She and Gerda got in; and then away they drove over the stumps of felled trees, deeper and deeper into the woods.
The little robber maiden was as tall as Gerda, but stronger, broader-shouldered, and of dark complexion; her eyes were quite black; they looked almost melancholy.
She embraced little Gerda, and said, "They shall not kill you as long as I am not displeased with you.
You are, doubtless, a Princess?
"
"No," said little Gerda; who then related all that had happened to her, and how much she cared about little Kay.
The little robber maiden looked at her with a serious air, nodded her head slightly, and said, "They shall not kill you, even if I am angry with you: then I will do it myself"; and she dried Gerda's eyes, and put both her hands in the handsome muff, which was so soft and warm.
At length the carriage stopped.
They were in the midst of the court-yard of a robber's castle.
It was full of cracks from top to bottom; and out of the openings magpies and rooks were flying; and the great bull-dogs, each of which looked as if he could swallow a man, jumped up, but they did not bark, for that was forbidden.
In the midst of the large, old, smoking hall burnt a great fire on the stone floor.
The smoke disappeared under the stones, and had to seek its own egress.
In an immense caldron soup was boiling; and rabbits and hares were being roasted on a spit.
"You shall sleep with me to-night, with all my animals," said the little robber maiden.
They had something to eat and drink; and then went into a corner, where straw and carpets were lying.
Beside them, on laths and perches, sat nearly a hundred pigeons, all asleep, seemingly; but yet they moved a little when the robber maiden came.
"They are all mine," said she, at the same time seizing one that was next to her by the legs and shaking it so that its wings fluttered.
"Kiss it," cried the little girl, and flung the pigeon in Gerda's face.
"Up there is the rabble of the wood," continued she, pointing to several laths which were fastened before a hole high up in the wall; "that's the rabble; they would all fly away immediately, if they were not well fastened in.
And here is my dear old Bac"; and she laid hold of the horns of a reindeer, that had a bright copper ring round its neck, and was tethered to the spot.
"We are obliged to lock this fellow in too, or he would make his escape.
Every evening I tickle his neck with my sharp knife; he is so frightened at it!
" and the little girl drew forth a long knife, from a crack in the wall, and let it glide over the Reindeer's neck.
The poor animal kicked; the girl laughed, and pulled Gerda into bed with her.
"Do you intend to keep your knife while you sleep?
" asked Gerda; looking at it rather fearfully.
"I always sleep with the knife," said the little robber maiden.
"There is no knowing what may happen.
But tell me now, once more, all about little Kay; and why you have started off in the wide world alone.
" And Gerda related all, from the very beginning: the Wood-pigeons cooed above in their cage, and the others slept.
The little robber maiden wound her arm round Gerda's neck, held the knife in the other hand, and snored so loud that everybody could hear her; but Gerda could not close her eyes, for she did not know whether she was to live or die.
The robbers sat round the fire, sang and drank; and the old female robber jumped about so, that it was quite dreadful for Gerda to see her.
Then the Wood-pigeons said, "Coo!
Coo!
We have seen little Kay!
A white hen carries his sledge; he himself sat in the carriage of the Snow Queen, who passed here, down just over the wood, as we lay in our nest.
She blew upon us young ones; and all died except we two.
Coo!
Coo!
"
"What is that you say up there?
" cried little Gerda.
"Where did the Snow Queen go to?
Do you know anything about it?
"
"She is no doubt gone to Lapland; for there is always snow and ice there.
Only ask the Reindeer, who is tethered there.
"
"Ice and snow is there!
There it is, glorious and beautiful!
" said the Reindeer.
"One can spring about in the large shining valleys!
The Snow Queen has her summer-tent there; but her fixed abode is high up towards the North Pole, on the Island called Spitzbergen.
"
"Oh, Kay!
Poor little Kay!
" sighed Gerda.
"Do you choose to be quiet?
" said the robber maiden.
"If you don't, I shall make you.
"
In the morning Gerda told her all that the Wood-pigeons had said; and the little maiden looked very serious, but she nodded her head, and said, "That's no matter - that's no matter.
Do you know where Lapland lies!
" she asked of the Reindeer.
"Who should know better than I?
" said the animal; and his eyes rolled in his head.
"I was born and bred there - there I leapt about on the fields of snow.
"
"Listen," said the robber maiden to Gerda.
"You see that the men are gone; but my mother is still here, and will remain.
However, towards morning she takes a draught out of the large flask, and then she sleeps a little: then I will do something for you.
" She now jumped out of bed, flew to her mother; with her arms round her neck, and pulling her by the beard, said, "Good morrow, my own sweet nanny-goat of a mother.
" And her mother took hold of her nose, and pinched it till it was red and blue; but this was all done out of pure love.
When the mother had taken a sup at her flask, and was having a nap, the little robber maiden went to the Reindeer, and said, "I should very much like to give you still many a tickling with the sharp knife, for then you are so amusing; however, I will untether you, and help you out, so that you may go back to Lapland.
But you must make good use of your legs; and take this little girl for me to the palace of the Snow Queen, where her playfellow is.
You have heard, I suppose, all she said; for she spoke loud enough, and you were listening.
"
The Reindeer gave a bound for joy.
The robber maiden lifted up little Gerda, and took the precaution to bind her fast on the Reindeer's back; she even gave her a small cushion to sit on.
"Here are your worsted leggins, for it will be cold; but the muff I shall keep for myself, for it is so very pretty.
But I do not wish you to be cold.
Here is a pair of lined gloves of my mother's; they just reach up to your elbow.
On with them!
Now you look about the hands just like my ugly old mother!
"
And Gerda wept for joy.
"I can't bear to see you fretting," said the little robber maiden.
"This is just the time when you ought to look pleased.
Here are two loaves and a ham for you, so that you won't starve.
" The bread and the meat were fastened to the Reindeer's back; the little maiden opened the door, called in all the dogs, and then with her knife cut the rope that fastened the animal, and said to him, "Now, off with you; but take good care of the little girl!
"
And Gerda stretched out her hands with the large wadded gloves towards the robber maiden, and said, "Farewell!
" and the Reindeer flew on over bush and bramble through the great wood, over moor and heath, as fast as he could go.
"Ddsa!
Ddsa!
" was heard in the sky.
It was just as if somebody was sneezing.
"These are my old northern-lights," said the Reindeer, "look how they gleam!
" And on he now sped still quicker - day and night on he went: the loaves were consumed, and the ham too; and now they were in Lapland.
Suddenly they stopped before a little house, which looked very miserable.
The roof reached to the ground; and the door was so low, that the family were obliged to creep upon their stomachs when they went in or out.
Nobody was at home except an old Lapland woman, who was dressing fish by the light of an oil lamp.
And the Reindeer told her the whole of Gerda's history, but first of all his own; for that seemed to him of much greater importance.
Gerda was so chilled that she could not speak.
"Poor thing," said the Lapland woman, "you have far to run still.
You have more than a hundred miles to go before you get to Finland; there the Snow Queen has her country-house, and burns blue lights every evening.
I will give you a few words from me, which I will write on a dried haberdine, for paper I have none; this you can take with you to the Finland woman, and she will be able to give you more information than I can.
"
When Gerda had warmed herself, and had eaten and drunk, the Lapland woman wrote a few words on a dried haberdine, begged Gerda to take care of them, put her on the Reindeer, bound her fast, and away sprang the animal.
"Ddsa!
Ddsa!
" was again heard in the air; the most charming blue lights burned the whole night in the sky, and at last they came to Finland.
They knocked at the chimney of the Finland woman; for as to a door, she had none.
There was such a heat inside that the Finland woman herself went about almost naked.
She was diminutive and dirty.
She immediately loosened little Gerda's clothes, pulled off her thick gloves and boots; for otherwise the heat would have been too great - and after laying a piece of ice on the Reindeer's head, read what was written on the fish-skin.
She read it three times: she then knew it by heart; so she put the fish into the cupboard - for it might very well be eaten, and she never threw anything away.
Then the Reindeer related his own story first, and afterwards that of little Gerda; and the Finland woman winked her eyes, but said nothing.
"You are so clever," said the Reindeer; "you can, I know, twist all the winds of the world together in a knot.
If the seaman loosens one knot, then he has a good wind; if a second, then it blows pretty stiffly; if he undoes the third and fourth, then it rages so that the forests are upturned.
Will you give the little maiden a potion, that she may possess the strength of twelve men, and vanquish the Snow Queen?
"
"The strength of twelve men!
" said the Finland woman.
"Much good that would be!
" Then she went to a cupboard, and drew out a large skin rolled up.
When she had unrolled it, strange characters were to be seen written thereon; and the Finland woman read at such a rate that the perspiration trickled down her forehead.
But the Reindeer begged so hard for little Gerda, and Gerda looked so imploringly with tearful eyes at the Finland woman, that she winked, and drew the Reindeer aside into a corner, where they whispered together, while the animal got some fresh ice put on his head.
"'Tis true little Kay is at the Snow Queen's, and finds everything there quite to his taste; and he thinks it the very best place in the world; but the reason of that is, he has a splinter of glass in his eye, and in his heart.
These must be got out first; otherwise he will never go back to mankind, and the Snow Queen will retain her power over him.
"
"But can you give little Gerda nothing to take which will endue her with power over the whole?
"
"I can give her no more power than what she has already.
Don't you see how great it is?
Don't you see how men and animals are forced to serve her; how well she gets through the world barefooted?
She must not hear of her power from us; that power lies in her heart, because she is a sweet and innocent child!
If she cannot get to the Snow Queen by herself, and rid little Kay of the glass, we cannot help her.
Two miles hence the garden of the Snow Queen begins; thither you may carry the little girl.
Set her down by the large bush with red berries, standing in the snow; don't stay talking, but hasten back as fast as possible.
" And now the Finland woman placed little Gerda on the Reindeer's back, and off he ran with all imaginable speed.
"Oh!
I have not got my boots!
I have not brought my gloves!
" cried little Gerda.
She remarked she was without them from the cutting frost; but the Reindeer dared not stand still; on he ran till he came to the great bush with the red berries, and there he set Gerda down, kissed her mouth, while large bright tears flowed from the animal's eyes, and then back he went as fast as possible.
There stood poor Gerda now, without shoes or gloves, in the very middle of dreadful icy Finland.
She ran on as fast as she could.
There then came a whole regiment of snow-flakes, but they did not fall from above, and they were quite bright and shining from the Aurora Borealis.
The flakes ran along the ground, and the nearer they came the larger they grew.
Gerda well remembered how large and strange the snow-flakes appeared when she once saw them through a magnifying-glass; but now they were large and terrific in another manner - they were all alive.
They were the outposts of the Snow Queen.
They had the most wondrous shapes; some looked like large ugly porcupines; others like snakes knotted together, with their heads sticking out; and others, again, like small fat bears, with the hair standing on end: all were of dazzling whiteness - all were living snow-flakes.
Little Gerda repeated the Lord's Prayer.
The cold was so intense that she could see her own breath, which came like smoke out of her mouth.
It grew thicker and thicker, and took the form of little angels, that grew more and more when they touched the earth.
All had helms on their heads, and lances and shields in their hands; they increased in numbers; and when Gerda had finished the Lord's Prayer, she was surrounded by a whole legion.
They thrust at the horrid snow-flakes with their spears, so that they flew into a thousand pieces; and little Gerda walked on bravely and in security.
The angels patted her hands and feet; and then she felt the cold less, and went on quickly towards the palace of the Snow Queen.
But now we shall see how Kay fared.
He never thought of Gerda, and least of all that she was standing before the palace.
The walls of the palace were of driving snow, and the windows and doors of cutting winds.
There were more than a hundred halls there, according as the snow was driven by the winds.
The largest was many miles in extent; all were lighted up by the powerful Aurora Borealis, and all were so large, so empty, so icy cold, and so resplendent!
Mirth never reigned there; there was never even a little bear-ball, with the storm for music, while the polar bears went on their hind legs and showed off their steps.
Never a little tea-party of white young lady foxes; vast, cold, and empty were the halls of the Snow Queen.
The northern-lights shone with such precision that one could tell exactly when they were at their highest or lowest degree of brightness.
In the middle of the empty, endless hall of snow, was a frozen lake; it was cracked in a thousand pieces, but each piece was so like the other, that it seemed the work of a cunning artificer.
In the middle of this lake sat the Snow Queen when she was at home; and then she said she was sitting in the Mirror of Understanding, and that this was the only one and the best thing in the world.
Little Kay was quite blue, yes nearly black with cold; but he did not observe it, for she had kissed away all feeling of cold from his body, and his heart was a lump of ice.
He was dragging along some pointed flat pieces of ice, which he laid together in all possible ways, for he wanted to make something with them; just as we have little flat pieces of wood to make geometrical figures with, called the Chinese Puzzle.
Kay made all sorts of figures, the most complicated, for it was an ice-puzzle for the understanding.
In his eyes the figures were extraordinarily beautiful, and of the utmost importance; for the bit of glass which was in his eye caused this.
He found whole figures which represented a written word; but he never could manage to represent just the word he wanted - that word was "eternity"; and the Snow Queen had said, "If you can discover that figure, you shall be your own master, and I will make you a present of the whole world and a pair of new skates.
" But he could not find it out.
"I am going now to warm lands," said the Snow Queen.
"I must have a look down into the black caldrons.
" It was the volcanoes Vesuvius and Etna that she meant.
"I will just give them a coating of white, for that is as it ought to be; besides, it is good for the oranges and the grapes.
" And then away she flew, and Kay sat quite alone in the empty halls of ice that were miles long, and looked at the blocks of ice, and thought and thought till his skull was almost cracked.
There he sat quite benumbed and motionless; one would have imagined he was frozen to death.
Suddenly little Gerda stepped through the great portal into the palace.
The gate was formed of cutting winds; but Gerda repeated her evening prayer, and the winds were laid as though they slept; and the little maiden entered the vast, empty, cold halls.
There she beheld Kay: she recognised him, flew to embrace him, and cried out, her arms firmly holding him the while, "Kay, sweet little Kay!
Have I then found you at last?
"
But he sat quite still, benumbed and cold.
Then little Gerda shed burning tears; and they fell on his bosom, they penetrated to his heart, they thawed the lumps of ice, and consumed the splinters of the looking-glass; he looked at her, and she sang the hymn:
"The rose in the valley is blooming so sweet, And angels descend there the children to greet.
"
Hereupon Kay burst into tears; he wept so much that the splinter rolled out of his eye, and he recognised her, and shouted, "Gerda, sweet little Gerda!
Where have you been so long?
And where have I been?
" He looked round him.
"How cold it is here!
" said he.
"How empty and cold!
" And he held fast by Gerda, who laughed and wept for joy.
It was so beautiful, that even the blocks of ice danced about for joy; and when they were tired and laid themselves down, they formed exactly the letters which the Snow Queen had told him to find out; so now he was his own master, and he would have the whole world and a pair of new skates into the bargain.
Gerda kissed his cheeks, and they grew quite blooming; she kissed his eyes, and they shone like her own; she kissed his hands and feet, and he was again well and merry.
The Snow Queen might come back as soon as she liked; there stood his discharge written in resplendent masses of ice.
They took each other by the hand, and wandered forth out of the large hall; they talked of their old grandmother, and of the roses upon the roof; and wherever they went, the winds ceased raging, and the sun burst forth.
And when they reached the bush with the red berries, they found the Reindeer waiting for them.
He had brought another, a young one, with him, whose udder was filled with milk, which he gave to the little ones, and kissed their lips.
They then carried Kay and Gerda - first to the Finland woman, where they warmed themselves in the warm room, and learned what they were to do on their journey home; and they went to the Lapland woman, who made some new clothes for them and repaired their sledges.
The Reindeer and the young hind leaped along beside them, and accompanied them to the boundary of the country.
Here the first vegetation peeped forth; here Kay and Gerda took leave of the Lapland woman.
"Farewell!
Farewell!
" they all said.
And the first green buds appeared, the first little birds began to chirrup; and out of the wood came, riding on a magnificent horse, which Gerda knew (it was one of the leaders in the golden carriage), a young damsel with a bright-red cap on her head, and armed with pistols.
It was the little robber maiden, who, tired of being at home, had determined to make a journey to the north; and afterwards in another direction, if that did not please her.
She recognised Gerda immediately, and Gerda knew her too.
It was a joyful meeting.
"You are a fine fellow for tramping about," said she to little Kay; "I should like to know, faith, if you deserve that one should run from one end of the world to the other for your sake?
"
But Gerda patted her cheeks, and inquired for the Prince and Princess.
"They are gone abroad," said the other.
"But the Raven?
" asked little Gerda.
"Oh!
The Raven is dead," she answered.
"His tame sweetheart is a widow, and wears a bit of black worsted round her leg; she laments most piteously, but it's all mere talk and stuff!
Now tell me what you've been doing and how you managed to catch him.
"
And Gerda and Kay both told their story.
And "Schnipp-schnapp-schnurre-basselurre," said the robber maiden; and she took the hands of each, and promised that if she should some day pass through the town where they lived, she would come and visit them; and then away she rode.
Kay and Gerda took each other's hand: it was lovely spring weather, with abundance of flowers and of verdure.
The church-bells rang, and the children recognised the high towers, and the large town; it was that in which they dwelt.
They entered and hastened up to their grandmother's room, where everything was standing as formerly.
The clock said "tick!
tack!
" and the finger moved round; but as they entered, they remarked that they were now grown up.
The roses on the leads hung blooming in at the open window; there stood the little children's chairs, and Kay and Gerda sat down on them, holding each other by the hand; they both had forgotten the cold empty splendor of the Snow Queen, as though it had been a dream.
The grandmother sat in the bright sunshine, and read aloud from the Bible: "Unless ye become as little children, ye cannot enter the kingdom of heaven.
"
And Kay and Gerda looked in each other's eyes, and all at once they understood the old hymn:
"The rose in the valley is blooming so sweet, And angels descend there the children to greet.
"
There sat the two grown-up persons; grown-up, and yet children; children at least in heart; and it was summer-time; summer, glorious summer!
Every author has some peculiarity in his descriptions or in his style of writing.
Those who do not like him, magnify it, shrug up their shoulders, and exclaim - there he is again!
I, for my part, know very well how I can bring about this movement and this exclamation.
It would happen immediately if I were to begin here, as I intended to do, with: "Rome has its Corso, Naples its Toledo" - "Ah!
that Andersen; there he is again!
" they would cry; yet I must, to please my fancy, continue quite quietly, and add: "But Copenhagen has its East Street.
"
Here, then, we will stay for the present.
In one of the houses not far from the new market a party was invited - a very large party, in order, as is often the case, to get a return invitation from the others.
One half of the company was already seated at the card-table, the other half awaited the result of the stereotype preliminary observation of the lady of the house:
"Now let us see what we can do to amuse ourselves.
"
They had got just so far, and the conversation began to crystallise, as it could but do with the scanty stream which the commonplace world supplied.
Amongst other things they spoke of the middle ages: some praised that period as far more interesting, far more poetical than our own too sober present; indeed Councillor Knap defended this opinion so warmly, that the hostess declared immediately on his side, and both exerted themselves with unwearied eloquence.
The Councillor boldly declared the time of King Hans to be the noblest and the most happy period.
*
* A.D. 1482-1513
While the conversation turned on this subject, and was only for a moment interrupted by the arrival of a journal that contained nothing worth reading, we will just step out into the antechamber, where cloaks, mackintoshes, sticks, umbrellas, and shoes, were deposited.
Here sat two female figures, a young and an old one.
One might have thought at first they were servants come to accompany their mistresses home; but on looking nearer, one soon saw they could scarcely be mere servants; their forms were too noble for that, their skin too fine, the cut of their dress too striking.
Two fairies were they; the younger, it is true, was not Dame Fortune herself, but one of the waiting-maids of her handmaidens who carry about the lesser good things that she distributes; the other looked extremely gloomy - it was Care.
She always attends to her own serious business herself, as then she is sure of having it done properly.
They were telling each other, with a confidential interchange of ideas, where they had been during the day.
The messenger of Fortune had only executed a few unimportant commissions, such as saving a new bonnet from a shower of rain, etc.
; but what she had yet to perform was something quite unusual.
"I must tell you," said she, "that to-day is my birthday; and in honor of it, a pair of walking-shoes or galoshes has been entrusted to me, which I am to carry to mankind.
These shoes possess the property of instantly transporting him who has them on to the place or the period in which he most wishes to be; every wish, as regards time or place, or state of being, will be immediately fulfilled, and so at last man will be happy, here below.
"
"Do you seriously believe it?
" replied Care, in a severe tone of reproach.
"No; he will be very unhappy, and will assuredly bless the moment when he feels that he has freed himself from the fatal shoes.
"
"Stupid nonsense!
" said the other angrily.
"I will put them here by the door.
Some one will make a mistake for certain and take the wrong ones - he will be a happy man.
"
Such was their conversation.
II.
What Happened to the Councillor
It was late; Councillor Knap, deeply occupied with the times of King Hans, intended to go home, and malicious Fate managed matters so that his feet, instead of finding their way to his own galoshes, slipped into those of Fortune.
Thus caparisoned the good man walked out of the well-lighted rooms into East Street.
By the magic power of the shoes he was carried back to the times of King Hans; on which account his foot very naturally sank in the mud and puddles of the street, there having been in those days no pavement in Copenhagen.
"Well!
This is too bad!
How dirty it is here!
" sighed the Councillor.
"As to a pavement, I can find no traces of one, and all the lamps, it seems, have gone to sleep.
"
The moon was not yet very high; it was besides rather foggy, so that in the darkness all objects seemed mingled in chaotic confusion.
At the next corner hung a votive lamp before a Madonna, but the light it gave was little better than none at all; indeed, he did not observe it before he was exactly under it, and his eyes fell upon the bright colors of the pictures which represented the well-known group of the Virgin and the infant Jesus.
"That is probably a wax-work show," thought he; "and the people delay taking down their sign in hopes of a late visitor or two.
"
A few persons in the costume of the time of King Hans passed quickly by him.
"How strange they look!
The good folks come probably from a masquerade!
"
Suddenly was heard the sound of drums and fifes; the bright blaze of a fire shot up from time to time, and its ruddy gleams seemed to contend with the bluish light of the torches.
The Councillor stood still, and watched a most strange procession pass by.
First came a dozen drummers, who understood pretty well how to handle their instruments; then came halberdiers, and some armed with cross-bows.
The principal person in the procession was a priest.
Astonished at what he saw, the Councillor asked what was the meaning of all this mummery, and who that man was.
"That's the Bishop of Zealand," was the answer.
"Good Heavens!
What has taken possession of the Bishop?
" sighed the Councillor, shaking his head.
It certainly could not be the Bishop; even though he was considered the most absent man in the whole kingdom, and people told the drollest anecdotes about him.
Reflecting on the matter, and without looking right or left, the Councillor went through East Street and across the Habro-Platz.
The bridge leading to Palace Square was not to be found; scarcely trusting his senses, the nocturnal wanderer discovered a shallow piece of water, and here fell in with two men who very comfortably were rocking to and fro in a boat.
"Does your honor want to cross the ferry to the Holme?
" asked they.
"Across to the Holme!
" said the Councillor, who knew nothing of the age in which he at that moment was.
"No, I am going to Christianshafen, to Little Market Street.
"
Both men stared at him in astonishment.
"Only just tell me where the bridge is," said he.
"It is really unpardonable that there are no lamps here; and it is as dirty as if one had to wade through a morass.
"
The longer he spoke with the boatmen, the more unintelligible did their language become to him.
"I don't understand your Bornholmish dialect," said he at last, angrily, and turning his back upon them.
He was unable to find the bridge: there was no railway either.
"It is really disgraceful what a state this place is in," muttered he to himself.
Never had his age, with which, however, he was always grumbling, seemed so miserable as on this evening.
"I'll take a hackney-coach!
" thought he.
But where were the hackney-coaches?
Not one was to be seen.
"I must go back to the New Market; there, it is to be hoped, I shall find some coaches; for if I don't, I shall never get safe to Christianshafen.
"
So off he went in the direction of East Street, and had nearly got to the end of it when the moon shone forth.
"God bless me!
What wooden scaffolding is that which they have set up there?
" cried he involuntarily, as he looked at East Gate, which, in those days, was at the end of East Street.
He found, however, a little side-door open, and through this he went, and stepped into our New Market of the present time.
It was a huge desolate plain; some wild bushes stood up here and there, while across the field flowed a broad canal or river.
Some wretched hovels for the Dutch sailors, resembling great boxes, and after which the place was named, lay about in confused disorder on the opposite bank.
"I either behold a fata morgana, or I am regularly tipsy," whimpered out the Councillor.
"But what's this?
"
He turned round anew, firmly convinced that he was seriously ill.
He gazed at the street formerly so well known to him, and now so strange in appearance, and looked at the houses more attentively: most of them were of wood, slightly put together; and many had a thatched roof.
"No - I am far from well," sighed he; "and yet I drank only one glass of punch; but I cannot suppose it - it was, too, really very wrong to give us punch and hot salmon for supper.
I shall speak about it at the first opportunity.
I have half a mind to go back again, and say what I suffer.
But no, that would be too silly; and Heaven only knows if they are up still. "
He looked for the house, but it had vanished.
"It is really dreadful," groaned he with increasing anxiety; "I cannot recognise East Street again; there is not a single decent shop from one end to the other!
Nothing but wretched huts can I see anywhere; just as if I were at Ringstead.
Oh!
I am ill!
I can scarcely bear myself any longer.
Where the deuce can the house be?
It must be here on this very spot; yet there is not the slightest idea of resemblance, to such a degree has everything changed this night!
At all events here are some people up and stirring.
Oh!
oh!
I am certainly very ill."
He now hit upon a half-open door, through a chink of which a faint light shone.
It was a sort of hostelry of those times; a kind of public-house.
The room had some resemblance to the clay-floored halls in Holstein; a pretty numerous company, consisting of seamen, Copenhagen burghers, and a few scholars, sat here in deep converse over their pewter cans, and gave little heed to the person who entered.
"By your leave!
" said the Councillor to the Hostess, who came bustling towards him.
"I've felt so queer all of a sudden; would you have the goodness to send for a hackney-coach to take me to Christianshafen?
"
The woman examined him with eyes of astonishment, and shook her head; she then addressed him in German.
The Councillor thought she did not understand Danish, and therefore repeated his wish in German.
This, in connection with his costume, strengthened the good woman in the belief that he was a foreigner.
That he was ill, she comprehended directly; so she brought him a pitcher of water, which tasted certainly pretty strong of the sea, although it had been fetched from the well.
The Councillor supported his head on his hand, drew a long breath, and thought over all the wondrous things he saw around him.
"Is this the Daily News of this evening?
" he asked mechanically, as he saw the Hostess push aside a large sheet of paper.
The meaning of this councillorship query remained, of course, a riddle to her, yet she handed him the paper without replying.
It was a coarse wood-cut, representing a splendid meteor "as seen in the town of Cologne," which was to be read below in bright letters.
"That is very old!
" said the Councillor, whom this piece of antiquity began to make considerably more cheerful.
"Pray how did you come into possession of this rare print?
It is extremely interesting, although the whole is a mere fable.
Such meteorous appearances are to be explained in this way - that they are the reflections of the Aurora Borealis, and it is highly probable they are caused principally by electricity.
"
Those persons who were sitting nearest him and heard his speech, stared at him in wonderment; and one of them rose, took off his hat respectfully, and said with a serious countenance, "You are no doubt a very learned man, Monsieur.
"
"Oh no," answered the Councillor, "I can only join in conversation on this topic and on that, as indeed one must do according to the demands of the world at present.
"
"Modestia is a fine virtue," continued the gentleman; "however, as to your speech, I must say mihi secus videtur: yet I am willing to suspend my judicium.
"
"May I ask with whom I have the pleasure of speaking?
" asked the Councillor.
"I am a Bachelor in Theologia," answered the gentleman with a stiff reverence.
This reply fully satisfied the Councillor; the title suited the dress.
"He is certainly," thought he, "some village schoolmaster - some queer old fellow, such as one still often meets with in Jutland.
"
"This is no locus docendi, it is true," began the clerical gentleman; "yet I beg you earnestly to let us profit by your learning.
Your reading in the ancients is, sine dubio, of vast extent?
"
"Oh yes, I've read something, to be sure," replied the Councillor.
"I like reading all useful works; but I do not on that account despise the modern ones; 'tis only the unfortunate 'Tales of Every-day Life' that I cannot bear - we have enough and more than enough such in reality.
"
"'Tales of Every-day Life?
'" said our Bachelor inquiringly.
"I mean those new fangled novels, twisting and writhing themselves in the dust of commonplace, which also expect to find a reading public.
"
"Oh," exclaimed the clerical gentleman smiling, "there is much wit in them; besides they are read at court.
The King likes the history of Sir Iffven and Sir Gaudian particularly, which treats of King Arthur, and his Knights of the Round Table; he has more than once joked about it with his high vassals.
"
"I have not read that novel," said the Councillor; "it must be quite a new one, that Heiberg has published lately.
"
"No," answered the theologian of the time of King Hans: "that book is not written by a Heiberg, but was imprinted by Godfrey von Gehmen.
"
"Oh, is that the author's name?
" said the Councillor.
"It is a very old name, and, as well as I recollect, he was the first printer that appeared in Denmark.
"
"Yes, he is our first printer," replied the clerical gentleman hastily.
So far all went on well.
Some one of the worthy burghers now spoke of the dreadful pestilence that had raged in the country a few years back, meaning that of 1484.
The Councillor imagined it was the cholera that was meant, which people made so much fuss about; and the discourse passed off satisfactorily enough.
The war of the buccaneers of 1490 was so recent that it could not fail being alluded to; the English pirates had, they said, most shamefully taken their ships while in the roadstead; and the Councillor, before whose eyes the Herostratic [*] event of 1801 still floated vividly, agreed entirely with the others in abusing the rascally English.
With other topics he was not so fortunate; every moment brought about some new confusion, and threatened to become a perfect Babel; for the worthy Bachelor was really too ignorant, and the simplest observations of the Councillor sounded to him too daring and phantastical.
They looked at one another from the crown of the head to the soles of the feet; and when matters grew to too high a pitch, then the Bachelor talked Latin, in the hope of being better understood - but it was of no use after all.
* Herostratus, or Eratostratus - an Ephesian, who wantonly
set fire to the famous temple of Diana, in order to
commemorate his name by so uncommon an action.
"What's the matter?
" asked the Hostess, plucking the Councillor by the sleeve; and now his recollection returned, for in the course of the conversation he had entirely forgotten all that had preceded it.
"Merciful God, where am I!
" exclaimed he in agony; and while he so thought, all his ideas and feelings of overpowering dizziness, against which he struggled with the utmost power of desperation, encompassed him with renewed force.
"Let us drink claret and mead, and Bremen beer," shouted one of the guests - "and you shall drink with us!
"
Two maidens approached.
One wore a cap of two staring colors, denoting the class of persons to which she belonged.
They poured out the liquor, and made the most friendly gesticulations; while a cold perspiration trickled down the back of the poor Councillor.
"What's to be the end of this!
What's to become of me!
" groaned he; but he was forced, in spite of his opposition, to drink with the rest.
They took hold of the worthy man; who, hearing on every side that he was intoxicated, did not in the least doubt the truth of this certainly not very polite assertion; but on the contrary, implored the ladies and gentlemen present to procure him a hackney-coach: they, however, imagined he was talking Russian.
Never before, he thought, had he been in such a coarse and ignorant company; one might almost fancy the people had turned heathens again.
"It is the most dreadful moment of my life: the whole world is leagued against me!
" But suddenly it occurred to him that he might stoop down under the table, and then creep unobserved out of the door.
He did so; but just as he was going, the others remarked what he was about; they laid hold of him by the legs; and now, happily for him, off fell his fatal shoes - and with them the charm was at an end.
The Councillor saw quite distinctly before him a lantern burning, and behind this a large handsome house.
All seemed to him in proper order as usual; it was East Street, splendid and elegant as we now see it.
He lay with his feet towards a doorway, and exactly opposite sat the watchman asleep.
"Gracious Heaven!
" said he.
"Have I lain here in the street and dreamed?
Yes; 'tis East Street!
How splendid and light it is!
But really it is terrible what an effect that one glass of punch must have had on me!
"
Two minutes later, he was sitting in a hackney-coach and driving to Frederickshafen.
He thought of the distress and agony he had endured, and praised from the very bottom of his heart the happy reality - our own time - which, with all its deficiencies, is yet much better than that in which, so much against his inclination, he had lately been.
III.
The Watchman's Adventure
"Why, there is a pair of galoshes, as sure as I'm alive!
" said the watchman, awaking from a gentle slumber.
"They belong no doubt to the lieutenant who lives over the way.
They lie close to the door.
"
The worthy man was inclined to ring and deliver them at the house, for there was still a light in the window; but he did not like disturbing the other people in their beds, and so very considerately he left the matter alone.
"Such a pair of shoes must be very warm and comfortable," said he; "the leather is so soft and supple.
" They fitted his feet as though they had been made for him.
"'Tis a curious world we live in," continued he, soliloquizing.
"There is the lieutenant, now, who might go quietly to bed if he chose, where no doubt he could stretch himself at his ease; but does he do it?
No; he saunters up and down his room, because, probably, he has enjoyed too many of the good things of this world at his dinner.
That's a happy fellow!
He has neither an infirm mother, nor a whole troop of everlastingly hungry children to torment him.
Every evening he goes to a party, where his nice supper costs him nothing: would to Heaven I could but change with him!
How happy should I be!
"
While expressing his wish, the charm of the shoes, which he had put on, began to work; the watchman entered into the being and nature of the lieutenant.
He stood in the handsomely furnished apartment, and held between his fingers a small sheet of rose-colored paper, on which some verses were written - written indeed by the officer himself; for who has not, at least once in his life, had a lyrical moment?
And if one then marks down one's thoughts, poetry is produced.
But here was written:
OH, WERE I RICH!
"Oh, were I rich!
Such was my wish, yea such
When hardly three feet high, I longed for much.
Oh, were I rich!
an officer were I,
With sword, and uniform, and plume so high.
And the time came, and officer was I!
But yet I grew not rich.
Alas, poor me!
Have pity, Thou, who all man's wants dost see.
"I sat one evening sunk in dreams of bliss,
A maid of seven years old gave me a kiss,
I at that time was rich in poesy
And tales of old, though poor as poor could be;
But all she asked for was this poesy.
Then was I rich, but not in gold, poor me!
As Thou dost know, who all men's hearts canst see.
"Oh, were I rich!
Oft asked I for this boon.
The child grew up to womanhood full soon.
She is so pretty, clever, and so kind
Oh, did she know what's hidden in my mind -
A tale of old.
Would she to me were kind!
But I'm condemned to silence!
oh, poor me!
As Thou dost know, who all men's hearts canst see.
"Oh, were I rich in calm and peace of mind,
My grief you then would not here written find!
O thou, to whom I do my heart devote,
Oh read this page of glad days now remote,
A dark, dark tale, which I tonight devote!
Dark is the future now.
Alas, poor me!
Have pity Thou, who all men's pains dost see.
"
Such verses as these people write when they are in love!
But no man in his senses ever thinks of printing them.
Here one of the sorrows of life, in which there is real poetry, gave itself vent; not that barren grief which the poet may only hint at, but never depict in its detail - misery and want: that animal necessity, in short, to snatch at least at a fallen leaf of the bread-fruit tree, if not at the fruit itself.
The higher the position in which one finds oneself transplanted, the greater is the suffering.
Everyday necessity is the stagnant pool of life - no lovely picture reflects itself therein.
Lieutenant, love, and lack of money - that is a symbolic triangle, or much the same as the half of the shattered die of Fortune.
This the lieutenant felt most poignantly, and this was the reason he leant his head against the window, and sighed so deeply.
"The poor watchman out there in the street is far happier than I.
He knows not what I term privation.
He has a home, a wife, and children, who weep with him over his sorrows, who rejoice with him when he is glad.
Oh, far happier were I, could I exchange with him my being - with his desires and with his hopes perform the weary pilgrimage of life!
Oh, he is a hundred times happier than I!
"
In the same moment the watchman was again watchman.
It was the shoes that caused the metamorphosis by means of which, unknown to himself, he took upon him the thoughts and feelings of the officer; but, as we have just seen, he felt himself in his new situation much less contented, and now preferred the very thing which but some minutes before he had rejected.
So then the watchman was again watchman.
"That was an unpleasant dream," said he; "but 'twas droll enough altogether.
I fancied that I was the lieutenant over there: and yet the thing was not very much to my taste after all.
I missed my good old mother and the dear little ones; who almost tear me to pieces for sheer love.
"
He seated himself once more and nodded: the dream continued to haunt him, for he still had the shoes on his feet.
A falling star shone in the dark firmament.
"There falls another star," said he: "but what does it matter; there are always enough left.
I should not much mind examining the little glimmering things somewhat nearer, especially the moon; for that would not slip so easily through a man's fingers.
When we die - so at least says the student, for whom my wife does the washing - we shall fly about as light as a feather from one such a star to the other.
That's, of course, not true: but 'twould be pretty enough if it were so.
If I could but once take a leap up there, my body might stay here on the steps for what I care.
"
Behold - there are certain things in the world to which one ought never to give utterance except with the greatest caution; but doubly careful must one be when we have the Shoes of Fortune on our feet.
Now just listen to what happened to the watchman.
As to ourselves, we all know the speed produced by the employment of steam; we have experienced it either on railroads, or in boats when crossing the sea; but such a flight is like the travelling of a sloth in comparison with the velocity with which light moves.
It flies nineteen million times faster than the best race-horse; and yet electricity is quicker still.
Death is an electric shock which our heart receives; the freed soul soars upwards on the wings of electricity.
The sun's light wants eight minutes and some seconds to perform a journey of more than twenty million of our Danish [*] miles; borne by electricity, the soul wants even some minutes less to accomplish the same flight.
To it the space between the heavenly bodies is not greater than the distance between the homes of our friends in town is for us, even if they live a short way from each other; such an electric shock in the heart, however, costs us the use of the body here below; unless, like the watchman of East Street, we happen to have on the Shoes of Fortune.
* A Danish mile is nearly 4 3/4 English.
In a few seconds the watchman had done the fifty-two thousand of our miles up to the moon, which, as everyone knows, was formed out of matter much lighter than our earth; and is, so we should say, as soft as newly-fallen snow.
He found himself on one of the many circumjacent mountain-ridges with which we are acquainted by means of Dr. Madler's "Map of the Moon.
" Within, down it sunk perpendicularly into a caldron, about a Danish mile in depth; while below lay a town, whose appearance we can, in some measure, realize to ourselves by beating the white of an egg in a glass of water.
The matter of which it was built was just as soft, and formed similar towers, and domes, and pillars, transparent and rocking in the thin air; while above his head our earth was rolling like a large fiery ball.
He perceived immediately a quantity of beings who were certainly what we call "men"; yet they looked different to us.
A far more correct imagination than that of the pseudo-Herschel* had created them; and if they had been placed in rank and file, and copied by some skilful painter's hand, one would, without doubt, have exclaimed involuntarily, "What a beautiful arabesque!
"
*This relates to a book published some years ago in Germany, and said to be by Herschel, which contained a description of the moon and its inhabitants, written with such a semblance of truth that many were deceived by the imposture.
Probably a translation of the celebrated Moon hoax, written by Richard A. Locke, and originally published in New York.
They had a language too; but surely nobody can expect that the soul of the watchman should understand it.
Be that as it may, it did comprehend it; for in our souls there germinate far greater powers than we poor mortals, despite all our cleverness, have any notion of.
Does she not show us - she the queen in the land of enchantment - her astounding dramatic talent in all our dreams?
There every acquaintance appears and speaks upon the stage, so entirely in character, and with the same tone of voice, that none of us, when awake, were able to imitate it.
How well can she recall persons to our mind, of whom we have not thought for years; when suddenly they step forth "every inch a man," resembling the real personages, even to the finest features, and become the heroes or heroines of our world of dreams.
In reality, such remembrances are rather unpleasant: every sin, every evil thought, may, like a clock with alarm or chimes, be repeated at pleasure; then the question is if we can trust ourselves to give an account of every unbecoming word in our heart and on our lips.
The watchman's spirit understood the language of the inhabitants of the moon pretty well.
The Selenites* disputed variously about our earth, and expressed their doubts if it could be inhabited: the air, they said, must certainly be too dense to allow any rational dweller in the moon the necessary free respiration.
They considered the moon alone to be inhabited: they imagined it was the real heart of the universe or planetary system, on which the genuine Cosmopolites, or citizens of the world, dwelt.
What strange things men - no, what strange things Selenites sometimes take into their heads!
* Dwellers in the moon.
About politics they had a good deal to say.
But little Denmark must take care what it is about, and not run counter to the moon; that great realm, that might in an ill-humor bestir itself, and dash down a hail-storm in our faces, or force the Baltic to overflow the sides of its gigantic basin.
We will, therefore, not listen to what was spoken, and on no condition run in the possibility of telling tales out of school; but we will rather proceed, like good quiet citizens, to East Street, and observe what happened meanwhile to the body of the watchman.
He sat lifeless on the steps: the morning-star,* that is to say, the heavy wooden staff, headed with iron spikes, and which had nothing else in common with its sparkling brother in the sky, had glided from his hand; while his eyes were fixed with glassy stare on the moon, looking for the good old fellow of a spirit which still haunted it.
*The watchmen in Germany, had formerly, and in some places they still carry with them, on their rounds at night, a sort of mace or club, known in ancient times by the above denomination.
"What's the hour, watchman?
" asked a passer-by.
But when the watchman gave no reply, the merry roysterer, who was now returning home from a noisy drinking bout, took it into his head to try what a tweak of the nose would do, on which the supposed sleeper lost his balance, the body lay motionless, stretched out on the pavement: the man was dead.
When the patrol came up, all his comrades, who comprehended nothing of the whole affair, were seized with a dreadful fright, for dead he was, and he remained so.
The proper authorities were informed of the circumstance, people talked a good deal about it, and in the morning the body was carried to the hospital.
Now that would be a very pretty joke, if the spirit when it came back and looked for the body in East Street, were not to find one.
No doubt it would, in its anxiety, run off to the police, and then to the "Hue and Cry" office, to announce that "the finder will be handsomely rewarded," and at last away to the hospital; yet we may boldly assert that the soul is shrewdest when it shakes off every fetter, and every sort of leading-string - the body only makes it stupid.
The seemingly dead body of the watchman wandered, as we have said, to the hospital, where it was brought into the general viewing-room: and the first thing that was done here was naturally to pull off the galoshes - when the spirit, that was merely gone out on adventures, must have returned with the quickness of lightning to its earthly tenement.
It took its direction towards the body in a straight line; and a few seconds after, life began to show itself in the man.
He asserted that the preceding night had been the worst that ever the malice of fate had allotted him; he would not for two silver marks again go through what he had endured while moon-stricken; but now, however, it was over.
The same day he was discharged from the hospital as perfectly cured; but the Shoes meanwhile remained behind.
IV.
A Moment of Head Importance - An Evening's "Dramatic Readings" - A Most Strange Journey
Every inhabitant of Copenhagen knows, from personal inspection, how the entrance to Frederick's Hospital looks; but as it is possible that others, who are not Copenhagen people, may also read this little work, we will beforehand give a short description of it.
The extensive building is separated from the street by a pretty high railing, the thick iron bars of which are so far apart, that in all seriousness, it is said, some very thin fellow had of a night occasionally squeezed himself through to go and pay his little visits in the town.
The part of the body most difficult to manage on such occasions was, no doubt, the head; here, as is so often the case in the world, long-headed people get through best.
So much, then, for the introduction.
One of the young men, whose head, in a physical sense only, might be said to be of the thickest, had the watch that evening.
The rain poured down in torrents; yet despite these two obstacles, the young man was obliged to go out, if it were but for a quarter of an hour; and as to telling the door-keeper about it, that, he thought, was quite unnecessary, if, with a whole skin, he were able to slip through the railings.
There, on the floor lay the galoshes, which the watchman had forgotten; he never dreamed for a moment that they were those of Fortune; and they promised to do him good service in the wet; so he put them on.
The question now was, if he could squeeze himself through the grating, for he had never tried before.
Well, there he stood.
"Would to Heaven I had got my head through!
" said he, involuntarily; and instantly through it slipped, easily and without pain, notwithstanding it was pretty large and thick.
But now the rest of the body was to be got through!
"Ah!
I am much too stout," groaned he aloud, while fixed as in a vice.
"I had thought the head was the most difficult part of the matter - oh!
oh!
I really cannot squeeze myself through!
"
He now wanted to pull his over-hasty head back again, but he could not.
For his neck there was room enough, but for nothing more.
His first feeling was of anger; his next that his temper fell to zero.
The Shoes of Fortune had placed him in the most dreadful situation; and, unfortunately, it never occurred to him to wish himself free.
The pitch-black clouds poured down their contents in still heavier torrents; not a creature was to be seen in the streets.
To reach up to the bell was what he did not like; to cry aloud for help would have availed him little; besides, how ashamed would he have been to be found caught in a trap, like an outwitted fox!
How was he to twist himself through!
He saw clearly that it was his irrevocable destiny to remain a prisoner till dawn, or, perhaps, even late in the morning; then the smith must be fetched to file away the bars; but all that would not be done so quickly as he could think about it.
The whole Charity School, just opposite, would be in motion; all the new booths, with their not very courtier-like swarm of seamen, would join them out of curiosity, and would greet him with a wild "hurrah!
" while he was standing in his pillory: there would be a mob, a hissing, and rejoicing, and jeering, ten times worse than in the rows about the Jews some years ago - "Oh, my blood is mounting to my brain; 'tis enough to drive one mad!
I shall go wild!
I know not what to do.
Oh!
were I but loose; my dizziness would then cease; oh, were my head but loose!
"
You see he ought to have said that sooner; for the moment he expressed the wish his head was free; and cured of all his paroxysms of love, he hastened off to his room, where the pains consequent on the fright the Shoes had prepared for him, did not so soon take their leave.
But you must not think that the affair is over now; it grows much worse.
The night passed, the next day also; but nobody came to fetch the Shoes.
In the evening "Dramatic Readings" were to be given at the little theatre in King Street.
The house was filled to suffocation; and among other pieces to be recited was a new poem by H. C. Andersen, called, My Aunt's Spectacles; the contents of which were pretty nearly as follows:
"A certain person had an aunt, who boasted of particular skill in fortune-telling with cards, and who was constantly being stormed by persons that wanted to have a peep into futurity.
But she was full of mystery about her art, in which a certain pair of magic spectacles did her essential service.
Her nephew, a merry boy, who was his aunt's darling, begged so long for these spectacles, that, at last, she lent him the treasure, after having informed him, with many exhortations, that in order to execute the interesting trick, he need only repair to some place where a great many persons were assembled; and then, from a higher position, whence he could overlook the crowd, pass the company in review before him through his spectacles.
Immediately 'the inner man' of each individual would be displayed before him, like a game of cards, in which he unerringly might read what the future of every person presented was to be.
Well pleased the little magician hastened away to prove the powers of the spectacles in the theatre; no place seeming to him more fitted for such a trial.
He begged permission of the worthy audience, and set his spectacles on his nose.
A motley phantasmagoria presents itself before him, which he describes in a few satirical touches, yet without expressing his opinion openly: he tells the people enough to set them all thinking and guessing; but in order to hurt nobody, he wraps his witty oracular judgments in a transparent veil, or rather in a lurid thundercloud, shooting forth bright sparks of wit, that they may fall in the powder-magazine of the expectant audience.
"
The humorous poem was admirably recited, and the speaker much applauded.
Among the audience was the young man of the hospital, who seemed to have forgotten his adventure of the preceding night.
He had on the Shoes; for as yet no lawful owner had appeared to claim them; and besides it was so very dirty out-of-doors, they were just the thing for him, he thought.
The beginning of the poem he praised with great generosity: he even found the idea original and effective.
But that the end of it, like the Rhine, was very insignificant, proved, in his opinion, the author's want of invention; he was without genius, etc.
This was an excellent opportunity to have said something clever.
Meanwhile he was haunted by the idea - he should like to possess such a pair of spectacles himself; then, perhaps, by using them circumspectly, one would be able to look into people's hearts, which, he thought, would be far more interesting than merely to see what was to happen next year; for that we should all know in proper time, but the other never.
"I can now," said he to himself, "fancy the whole row of ladies and gentlemen sitting there in the front row; if one could but see into their hearts - yes, that would be a revelation - a sort of bazar.
In that lady yonder, so strangely dressed, I should find for certain a large milliner's shop; in that one the shop is empty, but it wants cleaning plain enough.
But there would also be some good stately shops among them.
Alas!
" sighed he, "I know one in which all is stately; but there sits already a spruce young shopman, which is the only thing that's amiss in the whole shop.
All would be splendidly decked out, and we should hear, 'Walk in, gentlemen, pray walk in; here you will find all you please to want.
' Ah!
I wish to Heaven I could walk in and take a trip right through the hearts of those present!
"
And behold!
to the Shoes of Fortune this was the cue; the whole man shrunk together and a most uncommon journey through the hearts of the front row of spectators, now began.
The first heart through which he came, was that of a middle-aged lady, but he instantly fancied himself in the room of the "Institution for the cure of the crooked and deformed," where casts of mis-shapen limbs are displayed in naked reality on the wall.
Yet there was this difference, in the institution the casts were taken at the entry of the patient; but here they were retained and guarded in the heart while the sound persons went away.
They were, namely, casts of female friends, whose bodily or mental deformities were here most faithfully preserved.
With the snake-like writhings of an idea he glided into another female heart; but this seemed to him like a large holy fane.
[*] The white dove of innocence fluttered over the altar.
How gladly would he have sunk upon his knees; but he must away to the next heart; yet he still heard the pealing tones of the organ, and he himself seemed to have become a newer and a better man; he felt unworthy to tread the neighboring sanctuary which a poor garret, with a sick bed-rid mother, revealed.
But God's warm sun streamed through the open window; lovely roses nodded from the wooden flower-boxes on the roof, and two sky-blue birds sang rejoicingly, while the sick mother implored God's richest blessings on her pious daughter.
* temple
He now crept on hands and feet through a butcher's shop; at least on every side, and above and below, there was nought but flesh.
It was the heart of a most respectable rich man, whose name is certain to be found in the Directory.
He was now in the heart of the wife of this worthy gentleman.
It was an old, dilapidated, mouldering dovecot.
The husband's portrait was used as a weather-cock, which was connected in some way or other with the doors, and so they opened and shut of their own accord, whenever the stern old husband turned round.
Hereupon he wandered into a boudoir formed entirely of mirrors, like the one in Castle Rosenburg; but here the glasses magnified to an astonishing degree.
On the floor, in the middle of the room, sat, like a Dalai-Lama, the insignificant "Self" of the person, quite confounded at his own greatness.
He then imagined he had got into a needle-case full of pointed needles of every size.
"This is certainly the heart of an old maid," thought he.
But he was mistaken.
It was the heart of a young military man; a man, as people said, of talent and feeling.
In the greatest perplexity, he now came out of the last heart in the row; he was unable to put his thoughts in order, and fancied that his too lively imagination had run away with him.
"Good Heavens!
" sighed he.
"I have surely a disposition to madness - 'tis dreadfully hot here; my blood boils in my veins and my head is burning like a coal.
" And he now remembered the important event of the evening before, how his head had got jammed in between the iron railings of the hospital.
"That's what it is, no doubt," said he.
"I must do something in time: under such circumstances a Russian bath might do me good.
I only wish I were already on the upper bank.
" [*]
*In these Russian (vapor) baths the person extends himself
on a bank or form, and as he gets accustomed to the heat,
moves to another higher up towards the ceiling, where, of
course, the vapor is warmest.
In this manner he ascends
gradually to the highest.
And so there he lay on the uppermost bank in the vapor-bath; but with all his clothes on, in his boots and galoshes, while the hot drops fell scalding from the ceiling on his face.
"Holloa!
" cried he, leaping down.
The bathing attendant, on his side, uttered a loud cry of astonishment when he beheld in the bath, a man completely dressed.
The other, however, retained sufficient presence of mind to whisper to him, "'Tis a bet, and I have won it!
" But the first thing he did as soon as he got home, was to have a large blister put on his chest and back to draw out his madness.
The next morning he had a sore chest and a bleeding back; and, excepting the fright, that was all that he had gained by the Shoes of Fortune.
V. Metamorphosis of the Copying-Clerk
The watchman, whom we have certainly not forgotten, thought meanwhile of the galoshes he had found and taken with him to the hospital; he now went to fetch them; and as neither the lieutenant, nor anybody else in the street, claimed them as his property, they were delivered over to the police-office.
*
*As on the continent, in all law and police practices nothing is verbal, but any circumstance, however trifling, is reduced to writing, the labor, as well as the number of papers that thus accumulate, is enormous.
In a police-office, consequently, we find copying-clerks among many other scribes of various denominations, of which, it seems, our hero was one.
"Why, I declare the Shoes look just like my own," said one of the clerks, eying the newly-found treasure, whose hidden powers, even he, sharp as he was, was not able to discover.
"One must have more than the eye of a shoemaker to know one pair from the other," said he, soliloquizing; and putting, at the same time, the galoshes in search of an owner, beside his own in the corner.
"Here, sir!
" said one of the men, who panting brought him a tremendous pile of papers.
The copying-clerk turned round and spoke awhile with the man about the reports and legal documents in question; but when he had finished, and his eye fell again on the Shoes, he was unable to say whether those to the left or those to the right belonged to him.
"At all events it must be those which are wet," thought he; but this time, in spite of his cleverness, he guessed quite wrong, for it was just those of Fortune which played as it were into his hands, or rather on his feet.
And why, I should like to know, are the police never to be wrong?
So he put them on quickly, stuck his papers in his pocket, and took besides a few under his arm, intending to look them through at home to make the necessary notes.
It was noon; and the weather, that had threatened rain, began to clear up, while gaily dressed holiday folks filled the streets.
"A little trip to Fredericksburg would do me no great harm," thought he; "for I, poor beast of burden that I am, have so much to annoy me, that I don't know what a good appetite is.
'Tis a bitter crust, alas!
at which I am condemned to gnaw!
"
Nobody could be more steady or quiet than this young man; we therefore wish him joy of the excursion with all our heart; and it will certainly be beneficial for a person who leads so sedentary a life.
In the park he met a friend, one of our young poets, who told him that the following day he should set out on his long-intended tour.
"So you are going away again!
" said the clerk.
"You are a very free and happy being; we others are chained by the leg and held fast to our desk.
"
"Yes; but it is a chain, friend, which ensures you the blessed bread of existence," answered the poet.
"You need feel no care for the coming morrow: when you are old, you receive a pension.
"
"True," said the clerk, shrugging his shoulders; "and yet you are the better off.
To sit at one's ease and poetise - that is a pleasure; everybody has something agreeable to say to you, and you are always your own master.
No, friend, you should but try what it is to sit from one year's end to the other occupied with and judging the most trivial matters.
"
The poet shook his head, the copying-clerk did the same.
Each one kept to his own opinion, and so they separated.
"It's a strange race, those poets!
" said the clerk, who was very fond of soliloquizing.
"I should like some day, just for a trial, to take such nature upon me, and be a poet myself; I am very sure I should make no such miserable verses as the others.
Today, methinks, is a most delicious day for a poet.
Nature seems anew to celebrate her awakening into life.
The air is so unusually clear, the clouds sail on so buoyantly, and from the green herbage a fragrance is exhaled that fills me with delight.
For many a year have I not felt as at this moment.
"
We see already, by the foregoing effusion, that he is become a poet; to give further proof of it, however, would in most cases be insipid, for it is a most foolish notion to fancy a poet different from other men.
Among the latter there may be far more poetical natures than many an acknowledged poet, when examined more closely, could boast of; the difference only is, that the poet possesses a better mental memory, on which account he is able to retain the feeling and the thought till they can be embodied by means of words; a faculty which the others do not possess.
But the transition from a commonplace nature to one that is richly endowed, demands always a more or less breakneck leap over a certain abyss which yawns threateningly below; and thus must the sudden change with the clerk strike the reader.
"The sweet air!
" continued he of the police-office, in his dreamy imaginings; "how it reminds me of the violets in the garden of my aunt Magdalena!
Yes, then I was a little wild boy, who did not go to school very regularly.
O heavens!
'tis a long time since I have thought on those times.
The good old soul!
She lived behind the Exchange.
She always had a few twigs or green shoots in water - let the winter rage without as it might.
The violets exhaled their sweet breath, whilst I pressed against the windowpanes covered with fantastic frost-work the copper coin I had heated on the stove, and so made peep-holes.
What splendid vistas were then opened to my view!
What change - what magnificence!
Yonder in the canal lay the ships frozen up, and deserted by their whole crews, with a screaming crow for the sole occupant.
But when the spring, with a gentle stirring motion, announced her arrival, a new and busy life arose; with songs and hurrahs the ice was sawn asunder, the ships were fresh tarred and rigged, that they might sail away to distant lands.
But I have remained here - must always remain here, sitting at my desk in the office, and patiently see other people fetch their passports to go abroad.
Such is my fate!
Alas!
" - sighed he, and was again silent.
"Great Heaven!
What is come to me!
Never have I thought or felt like this before!
It must be the summer air that affects me with feelings almost as disquieting as they are refreshing.
"
He felt in his pocket for the papers.
"These police-reports will soon stem the torrent of my ideas, and effectually hinder any rebellious overflowing of the time-worn banks of official duties"; he said to himself consolingly, while his eye ran over the first page.
"DAME TIGBRITH, tragedy in five acts.
" "What is that?
And yet it is undeniably my own handwriting.
Have I written the tragedy?
Wonderful, very wonderful! - And this - what have I here?
'INTRIGUE ON THE RAMPARTS; or THE DAY OF REPENTANCE: vaudeville with new songs to the most favorite airs.
' The deuce!
Where did I get all this rubbish?
Some one must have slipped it slyly into my pocket for a joke.
There is too a letter to me; a crumpled letter and the seal broken.
"
Yes; it was not a very polite epistle from the manager of a theatre, in which both pieces were flatly refused.
"Hem!
hem!
" said the clerk breathlessly, and quite exhausted he seated himself on a bank.
His thoughts were so elastic, his heart so tender; and involuntarily he picked one of the nearest flowers.
It is a simple daisy, just bursting out of the bud.
What the botanist tells us after a number of imperfect lectures, the flower proclaimed in a minute.
It related the mythus of its birth, told of the power of the sun-light that spread out its delicate leaves, and forced them to impregnate the air with their incense - and then he thought of the manifold struggles of life, which in like manner awaken the budding flowers of feeling in our bosom.
Light and air contend with chivalric emulation for the love of the fair flower that bestowed her chief favors on the latter; full of longing she turned towards the light, and as soon as it vanished, rolled her tender leaves together and slept in the embraces of the air.
"It is the light which adorns me," said the flower.
"But 'tis the air which enables thee to breathe," said the poet's voice.
Close by stood a boy who dashed his stick into a wet ditch.
The drops of water splashed up to the green leafy roof, and the clerk thought of the million of ephemera which in a single drop were thrown up to a height, that was as great doubtless for their size, as for us if we were to be hurled above the clouds.
While he thought of this and of the whole metamorphosis he had undergone, he smiled and said, "I sleep and dream; but it is wonderful how one can dream so naturally, and know besides so exactly that it is but a dream.
If only to-morrow on awaking, I could again call all to mind so vividly!
I seem in unusually good spirits; my perception of things is clear, I feel as light and cheerful as though I were in heaven; but I know for a certainty, that if to-morrow a dim remembrance of it should swim before my mind, it will then seem nothing but stupid nonsense, as I have often experienced already - especially before I enlisted under the banner of the police, for that dispels like a whirlwind all the visions of an unfettered imagination.
All we hear or say in a dream that is fair and beautiful is like the gold of the subterranean spirits; it is rich and splendid when it is given us, but viewed by daylight we find only withered leaves.
Alas!
" he sighed quite sorrowful, and gazed at the chirping birds that hopped contentedly from branch to branch, "they are much better off than I!
To fly must be a heavenly art; and happy do I prize that creature in which it is innate.
Yes!
Could I exchange my nature with any other creature, I fain would be such a happy little lark!
"
He had hardly uttered these hasty words when the skirts and sleeves of his coat folded themselves together into wings; the clothes became feathers, and the galoshes claws.
He observed it perfectly, and laughed in his heart.
"Now then, there is no doubt that I am dreaming; but I never before was aware of such mad freaks as these.
" And up he flew into the green roof and sang; but in the song there was no poetry, for the spirit of the poet was gone.
The Shoes, as is the case with anybody who does what he has to do properly, could only attend to one thing at a time.
He wanted to be a poet, and he was one; he now wished to be a merry chirping bird: but when he was metamorphosed into one, the former peculiarities ceased immediately.
"It is really pleasant enough," said he: "the whole day long I sit in the office amid the driest law-papers, and at night I fly in my dream as a lark in the gardens of Fredericksburg; one might really write a very pretty comedy upon it.
" He now fluttered down into the grass, turned his head gracefully on every side, and with his bill pecked the pliant blades of grass, which, in comparison to his present size, seemed as majestic as the palm-branches of northern Africa.
Unfortunately the pleasure lasted but a moment.
Presently black night overshadowed our enthusiast, who had so entirely missed his part of copying-clerk at a police-office; some vast object seemed to be thrown over him.
It was a large oil-skin cap, which a sailor-boy of the quay had thrown over the struggling bird; a coarse hand sought its way carefully in under the broad rim, and seized the clerk over the back and wings.
In the first moment of fear, he called, indeed, as loud as he could - "You impudent little blackguard!
I am a copying-clerk at the police-office; and you know you cannot insult any belonging to the constabulary force without a chastisement.
Besides, you good-for-nothing rascal, it is strictly forbidden to catch birds in the royal gardens of Fredericksburg; but your blue uniform betrays where you come from.
" This fine tirade sounded, however, to the ungodly sailor-boy like a mere "Pippi-pi.
" He gave the noisy bird a knock on his beak, and walked on.
He was soon met by two schoolboys of the upper class - that is to say as individuals, for with regard to learning they were in the lowest class in the school; and they bought the stupid bird.
So the copying-clerk came to Copenhagen as guest, or rather as prisoner in a family living in Gother Street.
"'Tis well that I'm dreaming," said the clerk, "or I really should get angry.
First I was a poet; now sold for a few pence as a lark; no doubt it was that accursed poetical nature which has metamorphosed me into such a poor harmless little creature.
It is really pitiable, particularly when one gets into the hands of a little blackguard, perfect in all sorts of cruelty to animals: all I should like to know is, how the story will end.
"
The two schoolboys, the proprietors now of the transformed clerk, carried him into an elegant room.
A stout stately dame received them with a smile; but she expressed much dissatisfaction that a common field-bird, as she called the lark, should appear in such high society.
For to-day, however, she would allow it; and they must shut him in the empty cage that was standing in the window.
"Perhaps he will amuse my good Polly," added the lady, looking with a benignant smile at a large green parrot that swung himself backwards and forwards most comfortably in his ring, inside a magnificent brass-wired cage.
"To-day is Polly's birthday," said she with stupid simplicity: "and the little brown field-bird must wish him joy.
"
Mr. Polly uttered not a syllable in reply, but swung to and fro with dignified condescension; while a pretty canary, as yellow as gold, that had lately been brought from his sunny fragrant home, began to sing aloud.
"Noisy creature!
Will you be quiet!
" screamed the lady of the house, covering the cage with an embroidered white pocket handkerchief.
"Chirp, chirp!
" sighed he.
"That was a dreadful snowstorm"; and he sighed again, and was silent.
The copying-clerk, or, as the lady said, the brown field-bird, was put into a small cage, close to the Canary, and not far from "my good Polly.
" The only human sounds that the Parrot could bawl out were, "Come, let us be men!
" Everything else that he said was as unintelligible to everybody as the chirping of the Canary, except to the clerk, who was now a bird too: he understood his companion perfectly.
"I flew about beneath the green palms and the blossoming almond-trees," sang the Canary; "I flew around, with my brothers and sisters, over the beautiful flowers, and over the glassy lakes, where the bright water-plants nodded to me from below.
There, too, I saw many splendidly-dressed paroquets, that told the drollest stories, and the wildest fairy tales without end.
"
"Oh!
those were uncouth birds," answered the Parrot.
"They had no education, and talked of whatever came into their head.
"If my mistress and all her friends can laugh at what I say, so may you too, I should think.
It is a great fault to have no taste for what is witty or amusing - come, let us be men.
"
"Ah, you have no remembrance of love for the charming maidens that danced beneath the outspread tents beside the bright fragrant flowers?
Do you no longer remember the sweet fruits, and the cooling juice in the wild plants of our never-to-be-forgotten home?
" said the former inhabitant of the Canary Isles, continuing his dithyrambic.
"Oh, yes," said the Parrot; "but I am far better off here.
I am well fed, and get friendly treatment.
I know I am a clever fellow; and that is all I care about.
Come, let us be men.
You are of a poetical nature, as it is called - I, on the contrary, possess profound knowledge and inexhaustible wit.
You have genius; but clear-sighted, calm discretion does not take such lofty flights, and utter such high natural tones.
For this they have covered you over - they never do the like to me; for I cost more.
Besides, they are afraid of my beak; and I have always a witty answer at hand.
Come, let us be men!
"
"O warm spicy land of my birth," sang the Canary bird; "I will sing of thy dark-green bowers, of the calm bays where the pendent boughs kiss the surface of the water; I will sing of the rejoicing of all my brothers and sisters where the cactus grows in wanton luxuriance.
"
"Spare us your elegiac tones," said the Parrot giggling.
"Rather speak of something at which one may laugh heartily.
Laughing is an infallible sign of the highest degree of mental development.
Can a dog, or a horse laugh?
No, but they can cry.
The gift of laughing was given to man alone.
Ha!
ha!
ha!
" screamed Polly, and added his stereotype witticism.
"Come, let us be men!
"
"Poor little Danish grey-bird," said the Canary; "you have been caught too.
It is, no doubt, cold enough in your woods, but there at least is the breath of liberty; therefore fly away.
In the hurry they have forgotten to shut your cage, and the upper window is open.
Fly, my friend; fly away.
Farewell!
"
Instinctively the Clerk obeyed; with a few strokes of his wings he was out of the cage; but at the same moment the door, which was only ajar, and which led to the next room, began to creak, and supple and creeping came the large tomcat into the room, and began to pursue him.
The frightened Canary fluttered about in his cage; the Parrot flapped his wings, and cried, "Come, let us be men!
" The Clerk felt a mortal fright, and flew through the window, far away over the houses and streets.
At last he was forced to rest a little.
The neighboring house had a something familiar about it; a window stood open; he flew in; it was his own room.
He perched upon the table.
"Come, let us be men!
" said he, involuntarily imitating the chatter of the Parrot, and at the same moment he was again a copying-clerk; but he was sitting in the middle of the table.
"Heaven help me!
" cried he.
"How did I get up here - and so buried in sleep, too?
After all, that was a very unpleasant, disagreeable dream that haunted me!
The whole story is nothing but silly, stupid nonsense!
"
VI.
The Best That the Galoshes Gave
The following day, early in the morning, while the Clerk was still in bed, someone knocked at his door.
It was his neighbor, a young Divine, who lived on the same floor.
He walked in.
"Lend me your Galoshes," said he; "it is so wet in the garden, though the sun is shining most invitingly.
I should like to go out a little.
"
He got the Galoshes, and he was soon below in a little duodecimo garden, where between two immense walls a plumtree and an apple-tree were standing.
Even such a little garden as this was considered in the metropolis of Copenhagen as a great luxury.
The young man wandered up and down the narrow paths, as well as the prescribed limits would allow; the clock struck six; without was heard the horn of a post-boy.
"To travel!
to travel!
" exclaimed he, overcome by most painful and passionate remembrances.
"That is the happiest thing in the world!
That is the highest aim of all my wishes!
Then at last would the agonizing restlessness be allayed, which destroys my existence!
But it must be far, far away!
I would behold magnificent Switzerland; I would travel to Italy, and - "
It was a good thing that the power of the Galoshes worked as instantaneously as lightning in a powder-magazine would do, otherwise the poor man with his overstrained wishes would have travelled about the world too much for himself as well as for us.
In short, he was travelling.
He was in the middle of Switzerland, but packed up with eight other passengers in the inside of an eternally-creaking diligence; his head ached till it almost split, his weary neck could hardly bear the heavy load, and his feet, pinched by his torturing boots, were terribly swollen.
He was in an intermediate state between sleeping and waking; at variance with himself, with his company, with the country, and with the government.
In his right pocket he had his letter of credit, in the left, his passport, and in a small leathern purse some double louis d'or, carefully sewn up in the bosom of his waistcoat.
Every dream proclaimed that one or the other of these valuables was lost; wherefore he started up as in a fever; and the first movement which his hand made, described a magic triangle from the right pocket to the left, and then up towards the bosom, to feel if he had them all safe or not.
From the roof inside the carriage, umbrellas, walking-sticks, hats, and sundry other articles were depending, and hindered the view, which was particularly imposing.
He now endeavored as well as he was able to dispel his gloom, which was caused by outward chance circumstances merely, and on the bosom of nature imbibe the milk of purest human enjoyment.
Grand, solemn, and dark was the whole landscape around.
The gigantic pine-forests, on the pointed crags, seemed almost like little tufts of heather, colored by the surrounding clouds.
It began to snow, a cold wind blew and roared as though it were seeking a bride.
"Augh!
" sighed he, "were we only on the other side the Alps, then we should have summer, and I could get my letters of credit cashed.
The anxiety I feel about them prevents me enjoying Switzerland.
Were I but on the other side!
"
And so saying he was on the other side in Italy, between Florence and Rome.
Lake Thracymene, illumined by the evening sun, lay like flaming gold between the dark-blue mountain-ridges; here, where Hannibal defeated Flaminius, the rivers now held each other in their green embraces; lovely, half-naked children tended a herd of black swine, beneath a group of fragrant laurel-trees, hard by the road-side.
Could we render this inimitable picture properly, then would everybody exclaim, "Beautiful, unparalleled Italy!
" But neither the young Divine said so, nor anyone of his grumbling companions in the coach of the vetturino.
The poisonous flies and gnats swarmed around by thousands; in vain one waved myrtle-branches about like mad; the audacious insect population did not cease to sting; nor was there a single person in the well-crammed carriage whose face was not swollen and sore from their ravenous bites.
The poor horses, tortured almost to death, suffered most from this truly Egyptian plague; the flies alighted upon them in large disgusting swarms; and if the coachman got down and scraped them off, hardly a minute elapsed before they were there again.
The sun now set: a freezing cold, though of short duration pervaded the whole creation; it was like a horrid gust coming from a burial-vault on a warm summer's day - but all around the mountains retained that wonderful green tone which we see in some old pictures, and which, should we not have seen a similar play of color in the South, we declare at once to be unnatural.
It was a glorious prospect; but the stomach was empty, the body tired; all that the heart cared and longed for was good night-quarters; yet how would they be?
For these one looked much more anxiously than for the charms of nature, which every where were so profusely displayed.
The road led through an olive-grove, and here the solitary inn was situated.
Ten or twelve crippled-beggars had encamped outside.
The healthiest of them resembled, to use an expression of Marryat's, "Hunger's eldest son when he had come of age"; the others were either blind, had withered legs and crept about on their hands, or withered arms and fingerless hands.
It was the most wretched misery, dragged from among the filthiest rags.
"Excellenza, miserabili!
" sighed they, thrusting forth their deformed limbs to view.
Even the hostess, with bare feet, uncombed hair, and dressed in a garment of doubtful color, received the guests grumblingly.
The doors were fastened with a loop of string; the floor of the rooms presented a stone paving half torn up; bats fluttered wildly about the ceiling; and as to the smell therein - no - that was beyond description.
"You had better lay the cloth below in the stable," said one of the travellers; "there, at all events, one knows what one is breathing.
"
The windows were quickly opened, to let in a little fresh air.
Quicker, however, than the breeze, the withered, sallow arms of the beggars were thrust in, accompanied by the eternal whine of "Miserabili, miserabili, excellenza!
" On the walls were displayed innumerable inscriptions, written in nearly every language of Europe, some in verse, some in prose, most of them not very laudatory of "bella Italia.
"
The meal was served.
It consisted of a soup of salted water, seasoned with pepper and rancid oil.
The last ingredient played a very prominent part in the salad; stale eggs and roasted cocks'-combs furnished the grand dish of the repast; the wine even was not without a disgusting taste - it was like a medicinal draught.
At night the boxes and other effects of the passengers were placed against the rickety doors.
One of the travellers kept watch while the others slept.
The sentry was our young Divine.
How close it was in the chamber!
The heat oppressive to suffocation - the gnats hummed and stung unceasingly - the "miserabili" without whined and moaned in their sleep.
"Travelling would be agreeable enough," said he groaning, "if one only had no body, or could send it to rest while the spirit went on its pilgrimage unhindered, whither the voice within might call it.
Wherever I go, I am pursued by a longing that is insatiable - that I cannot explain to myself, and that tears my very heart.
I want something better than what is but what is fled in an instant.
But what is it, and where is it to be found?
Yet, I know in reality what it is I wish for.
Oh!
most happy were I, could I but reach one aim - could but reach the happiest of all!
"
And as he spoke the word he was again in his home; the long white curtains hung down from the windows, and in the middle of the floor stood the black coffin; in it he lay in the sleep of death.
His wish was fulfilled - the body rested, while the spirit went unhindered on its pilgrimage.
"Let no one deem himself happy before his end," were the words of Solon; and here was a new and brilliant proof of the wisdom of the old apothegm.
Every corpse is a sphynx of immortality; here too on the black coffin the sphynx gave us no answer to what he who lay within had written two days before:
"O mighty Death!
thy silence teaches nought,
Thou leadest only to the near grave's brink;
Is broken now the ladder of my thoughts?
Do I instead of mounting only sink?
Our heaviest grief the world oft seeth not,
Our sorest pain we hide from stranger eyes:
And for the sufferer there is nothing left
But the green mound that o'er the coffin lies.
"
Two figures were moving in the chamber.
We knew them both; it was the fairy of Care, and the emissary of Fortune.
They both bent over the corpse.
"Do you now see," said Care, "what happiness your Galoshes have brought to mankind?
"
"To him, at least, who slumbers here, they have brought an imperishable blessing," answered the other.
"Ah no!
" replied Care.
"He took his departure himself; he was not called away.
His mental powers here below were not strong enough to reach the treasures lying beyond this life, and which his destiny ordained he should obtain.
I will now confer a benefit on him.
"
And she took the Galoshes from his feet; his sleep of death was ended; and he who had been thus called back again to life arose from his dread couch in all the vigor of youth.
Care vanished, and with her the Galoshes.
She has no doubt taken them for herself, to keep them to all eternity.
Out in the woods stood a nice little Fir Tree.
The place he had was a very good one: the sun shone on him: as to fresh air, there was enough of that, and round him grew many large-sized comrades, pines as well as firs.
But the little Fir wanted so very much to be a grown-up tree.
He did not think of the warm sun and of the fresh air; he did not care for the little cottage children that ran about and prattled when they were in the woods looking for wild-strawberries.
The children often came with a whole pitcher full of berries, or a long row of them threaded on a straw, and sat down near the young tree and said, "Oh, how pretty he is!
What a nice little fir!
" But this was what the Tree could not bear to hear.
At the end of a year he had shot up a good deal, and after another year he was another long bit taller; for with fir trees one can always tell by the shoots how many years old they are.
"Oh!
Were I but such a high tree as the others are," sighed he.
"Then I should be able to spread out my branches, and with the tops to look into the wide world!
Then would the birds build nests among my branches: and when there was a breeze, I could bend with as much stateliness as the others!
"
Neither the sunbeams, nor the birds, nor the red clouds which morning and evening sailed above him, gave the little Tree any pleasure.
In winter, when the snow lay glittering on the ground, a hare would often come leaping along, and jump right over the little Tree.
Oh, that made him so angry!
But two winters were past, and in the third the Tree was so large that the hare was obliged to go round it.
"To grow and grow, to get older and be tall," thought the Tree - "that, after all, is the most delightful thing in the world!
"
In autumn the wood-cutters always came and felled some of the largest trees.
This happened every year; and the young Fir Tree, that had now grown to a very comely size, trembled at the sight; for the magnificent great trees fell to the earth with noise and cracking, the branches were lopped off, and the trees looked long and bare; they were hardly to be recognised; and then they were laid in carts, and the horses dragged them out of the wood.
Where did they go to?
What became of them?
In spring, when the swallows and the storks came, the Tree asked them, "Don't you know where they have been taken?
Have you not met them anywhere?
"
The swallows did not know anything about it; but the Stork looked musing, nodded his head, and said, "Yes; I think I know; I met many ships as I was flying hither from Egypt; on the ships were magnificent masts, and I venture to assert that it was they that smelt so of fir.
I may congratulate you, for they lifted themselves on high most majestically!
"
"Oh, were I but old enough to fly across the sea!
But how does the sea look in reality?
What is it like?
"
"That would take a long time to explain," said the Stork, and with these words off he went.
"Rejoice in thy growth!
" said the Sunbeams.
"Rejoice in thy vigorous growth, and in the fresh life that moveth within thee!
"
And the Wind kissed the Tree, and the Dew wept tears over him; but the Fir understood it not.
When Christmas came, quite young trees were cut down: trees which often were not even as large or of the same age as this Fir Tree, who could never rest, but always wanted to be off.
These young trees, and they were always the finest looking, retained their branches; they were laid on carts, and the horses drew them out of the wood.
"Where are they going to?
" asked the Fir.
"They are not taller than I; there was one indeed that was considerably shorter; and why do they retain all their branches?
Whither are they taken?
"
"We know!
We know!
" chirped the Sparrows.
"We have peeped in at the windows in the town below!
We know whither they are taken!
The greatest splendor and the greatest magnificence one can imagine await them.
We peeped through the windows, and saw them planted in the middle of the warm room and ornamented with the most splendid things, with gilded apples, with gingerbread, with toys, and many hundred lights!
"
"And then?
" asked the Fir Tree, trembling in every bough.
"And then?
What happens then?
"
"We did not see anything more: it was incomparably beautiful.
"
"I would fain know if I am destined for so glorious a career," cried the Tree, rejoicing.
"That is still better than to cross the sea!
What a longing do I suffer!
Were Christmas but come!
I am now tall, and my branches spread like the others that were carried off last year!
Oh!
were I but already on the cart!
Were I in the warm room with all the splendor and magnificence!
Yes; then something better, something still grander, will surely follow, or wherefore should they thus ornament me?
Something better, something still grander must follow - but what?
Oh, how I long, how I suffer!
I do not know myself what is the matter with me!
"
"Rejoice in our presence!
" said the Air and the Sunlight.
"Rejoice in thy own fresh youth!
"
But the Tree did not rejoice at all; he grew and grew, and was green both winter and summer.
People that saw him said, "What a fine tree!
" and towards Christmas he was one of the first that was cut down.
The axe struck deep into the very pith; the Tree fell to the earth with a sigh; he felt a pang - it was like a swoon; he could not think of happiness, for he was sorrowful at being separated from his home, from the place where he had sprung up.
He well knew that he should never see his dear old comrades, the little bushes and flowers around him, anymore; perhaps not even the birds!
The departure was not at all agreeable.
The Tree only came to himself when he was unloaded in a court-yard with the other trees, and heard a man say, "That one is splendid!
We don't want the others.
" Then two servants came in rich livery and carried the Fir Tree into a large and splendid drawing-room.
Portraits were hanging on the walls, and near the white porcelain stove stood two large Chinese vases with lions on the covers.
There, too, were large easy-chairs, silken sofas, large tables full of picture-books and full of toys, worth hundreds and hundreds of crowns - at least the children said so.
And the Fir Tree was stuck upright in a cask that was filled with sand; but no one could see that it was a cask, for green cloth was hung all round it, and it stood on a large gaily-colored carpet.
Oh!
how the Tree quivered!
What was to happen?
The servants, as well as the young ladies, decorated it.
On one branch there hung little nets cut out of colored paper, and each net was filled with sugarplums; and among the other boughs gilded apples and walnuts were suspended, looking as though they had grown there, and little blue and white tapers were placed among the leaves.
Dolls that looked for all the world like men - the Tree had never beheld such before - were seen among the foliage, and at the very top a large star of gold tinsel was fixed.
It was really splendid - beyond description splendid.
"This evening!
" they all said.
"How it will shine this evening!
"
"Oh!
" thought the Tree.
"If the evening were but come!
If the tapers were but lighted!
And then I wonder what will happen!
Perhaps the other trees from the forest will come to look at me!
Perhaps the sparrows will beat against the windowpanes!
I wonder if I shall take root here, and winter and summer stand covered with ornaments!
"
He knew very much about the matter - but he was so impatient that for sheer longing he got a pain in his back, and this with trees is the same thing as a headache with us.
The candles were now lighted - what brightness!
What splendor!
The Tree trembled so in every bough that one of the tapers set fire to the foliage.
It blazed up famously.
"Help!
Help!
" cried the young ladies, and they quickly put out the fire.
Now the Tree did not even dare tremble.
What a state he was in!
He was so uneasy lest he should lose something of his splendor, that he was quite bewildered amidst the glare and brightness; when suddenly both folding-doors opened and a troop of children rushed in as if they would upset the Tree.
The older persons followed quietly; the little ones stood quite still.
But it was only for a moment; then they shouted that the whole place re-echoed with their rejoicing; they danced round the Tree, and one present after the other was pulled off.
"What are they about?
" thought the Tree.
"What is to happen now!
" And the lights burned down to the very branches, and as they burned down they were put out one after the other, and then the children had permission to plunder the Tree.
So they fell upon it with such violence that all its branches cracked; if it had not been fixed firmly in the ground, it would certainly have tumbled down.
The children danced about with their beautiful playthings; no one looked at the Tree except the old nurse, who peeped between the branches; but it was only to see if there was a fig or an apple left that had been forgotten.
"A story!
A story!
" cried the children, drawing a little fat man towards the Tree.
He seated himself under it and said, "Now we are in the shade, and the Tree can listen too.
But I shall tell only one story.
Now which will you have; that about Ivedy-Avedy, or about Humpy-Dumpy, who tumbled downstairs, and yet after all came to the throne and married the princess?
"
"Ivedy-Avedy," cried some; "Humpy-Dumpy," cried the others.
There was such a bawling and screaming - the Fir Tree alone was silent, and he thought to himself, "Am I not to bawl with the rest?
Am I to do nothing whatever?
" for he was one of the company, and had done what he had to do.
And the man told about Humpy-Dumpy that tumbled down, who notwithstanding came to the throne, and at last married the princess.
And the children clapped their hands, and cried.
"Oh, go on!
Do go on!
" They wanted to hear about Ivedy-Avedy too, but the little man only told them about Humpy-Dumpy.
The Fir Tree stood quite still and absorbed in thought; the birds in the wood had never related the like of this.
"Humpy-Dumpy fell downstairs, and yet he married the princess!
Yes, yes!
That's the way of the world!
" thought the Fir Tree, and believed it all, because the man who told the story was so good-looking.
"Well, well!
who knows, perhaps I may fall downstairs, too, and get a princess as wife!
" And he looked forward with joy to the morrow, when he hoped to be decked out again with lights, playthings, fruits, and tinsel.
"I won't tremble to-morrow!
" thought the Fir Tree.
"I will enjoy to the full all my splendor!
To-morrow I shall hear again the story of Humpy-Dumpy, and perhaps that of Ivedy-Avedy too.
" And the whole night the Tree stood still and in deep thought.
In the morning the servant and the housemaid came in.
"Now then the splendor will begin again," thought the Fir.
But they dragged him out of the room, and up the stairs into the loft: and here, in a dark corner, where no daylight could enter, they left him.
"What's the meaning of this?
" thought the Tree.
"What am I to do here?
What shall I hear now, I wonder?
" And he leaned against the wall lost in reverie.
Time enough had he too for his reflections; for days and nights passed on, and nobody came up; and when at last somebody did come, it was only to put some great trunks in a corner, out of the way.
There stood the Tree quite hidden; it seemed as if he had been entirely forgotten.
"'Tis now winter out-of-doors!
" thought the Tree.
"The earth is hard and covered with snow; men cannot plant me now, and therefore I have been put up here under shelter till the spring-time comes!
How thoughtful that is!
How kind man is, after all!
If it only were not so dark here, and so terribly lonely!
Not even a hare!
And out in the woods it was so pleasant, when the snow was on the ground, and the hare leaped by; yes - even when he jumped over me; but I did not like it then!
It is really terribly lonely here!
"
"Squeak!
Squeak!
" said a little Mouse, at the same moment, peeping out of his hole.
And then another little one came.
They snuffed about the Fir Tree, and rustled among the branches.
"It is dreadfully cold," said the Mouse.
"But for that, it would be delightful here, old Fir, wouldn't it?
"
"I am by no means old," said the Fir Tree.
"There's many a one considerably older than I am.
"
"Where do you come from," asked the Mice; "and what can you do?
" They were so extremely curious.
"Tell us about the most beautiful spot on the earth.
Have you never been there?
Were you never in the larder, where cheeses lie on the shelves, and hams hang from above; where one dances about on tallow candles: that place where one enters lean, and comes out again fat and portly?
"
"I know no such place," said the Tree.
"But I know the wood, where the sun shines and where the little birds sing.
" And then he told all about his youth; and the little Mice had never heard the like before; and they listened and said,
"Well, to be sure!
How much you have seen!
How happy you must have been!
"
"I!
" said the Fir Tree, thinking over what he had himself related.
"Yes, in reality those were happy times.
" And then he told about Christmas-eve, when he was decked out with cakes and candles.
"Oh," said the little Mice, "how fortunate you have been, old Fir Tree!
"
"I am by no means old," said he.
"I came from the wood this winter; I am in my prime, and am only rather short for my age.
"
"What delightful stories you know," said the Mice: and the next night they came with four other little Mice, who were to hear what the Tree recounted: and the more he related, the more he remembered himself; and it appeared as if those times had really been happy times.
"But they may still come - they may still come!
Humpy-Dumpy fell downstairs, and yet he got a princess!
" and he thought at the moment of a nice little Birch Tree growing out in the woods: to the Fir, that would be a real charming princess.
"Who is Humpy-Dumpy?
" asked the Mice.
So then the Fir Tree told the whole fairy tale, for he could remember every single word of it; and the little Mice jumped for joy up to the very top of the Tree.
Next night two more Mice came, and on Sunday two Rats even; but they said the stories were not interesting, which vexed the little Mice; and they, too, now began to think them not so very amusing either.
"Do you know only one story?
" asked the Rats.
"Only that one," answered the Tree.
"I heard it on my happiest evening; but I did not then know how happy I was.
"
"It is a very stupid story!
Don't you know one about bacon and tallow candles?
Can't you tell any larder stories?
"
"No," said the Tree.
"Then good-bye," said the Rats; and they went home.
At last the little Mice stayed away also; and the Tree sighed: "After all, it was very pleasant when the sleek little Mice sat round me, and listened to what I told them.
Now that too is over.
But I will take good care to enjoy myself when I am brought out again.
"
But when was that to be?
Why, one morning there came a quantity of people and set to work in the loft.
The trunks were moved, the tree was pulled out and thrown - rather hard, it is true - down on the floor, but a man drew him towards the stairs, where the daylight shone.
"Now a merry life will begin again," thought the Tree.
He felt the fresh air, the first sunbeam - and now he was out in the courtyard.
All passed so quickly, there was so much going on around him, the Tree quite forgot to look to himself.
The court adjoined a garden, and all was in flower; the roses hung so fresh and odorous over the balustrade, the lindens were in blossom, the Swallows flew by, and said, "Quirre-vit!
My husband is come!
" but it was not the Fir Tree that they meant.
"Now, then, I shall really enjoy life," said he exultingly, and spread out his branches; but, alas, they were all withered and yellow!
It was in a corner that he lay, among weeds and nettles.
The golden star of tinsel was still on the top of the Tree, and glittered in the sunshine.
In the court-yard some of the merry children were playing who had danced at Christmas round the Fir Tree, and were so glad at the sight of him.
One of the youngest ran and tore off the golden star.
"Only look what is still on the ugly old Christmas tree!
" said he, trampling on the branches, so that they all cracked beneath his feet.
And the Tree beheld all the beauty of the flowers, and the freshness in the garden; he beheld himself, and wished he had remained in his dark corner in the loft; he thought of his first youth in the wood, of the merry Christmas-eve, and of the little Mice who had listened with so much pleasure to the story of Humpy-Dumpy.
"'Tis over - 'tis past!
" said the poor Tree.
"Had I but rejoiced when I had reason to do so!
But now 'tis past, 'tis past!
"
And the gardener's boy chopped the Tree into small pieces; there was a whole heap lying there.
The wood flamed up splendidly under the large brewing copper, and it sighed so deeply!
Each sigh was like a shot.
The boys played about in the court, and the youngest wore the gold star on his breast which the Tree had had on the happiest evening of his life.
However, that was over now - the Tree gone, the story at an end.
All, all was over - every tale must end at last.
A Flea, a Grasshopper, and a Leap-frog once wanted to see which could jump highest; and they invited the whole world, and everybody else besides who chose to come to see the festival.
Three famous jumpers were they, as everyone would say, when they all met together in the room.
"I will give my daughter to him who jumps highest," exclaimed the King; "for it is not so amusing where there is no prize to jump for.
"
The Flea was the first to step forward.
He had exquisite manners, and bowed to the company on all sides; for he had noble blood, and was, moreover, accustomed to the society of man alone; and that makes a great difference.
Then came the Grasshopper.
He was considerably heavier, but he was well-mannered, and wore a green uniform, which he had by right of birth; he said, moreover, that he belonged to a very ancient Egyptian family, and that in the house where he then was, he was thought much of.
The fact was, he had been just brought out of the fields, and put in a pasteboard house, three stories high, all made of court-cards, with the colored side inwards; and doors and windows cut out of the body of the Queen of Hearts.
"I sing so well," said he, "that sixteen native grasshoppers who have chirped from infancy, and yet got no house built of cards to live in, grew thinner than they were before for sheer vexation when they heard me.
"
It was thus that the Flea and the Grasshopper gave an account of themselves, and thought they were quite good enough to marry a Princess.
The Leap-frog said nothing; but people gave it as their opinion, that he therefore thought the more; and when the housedog snuffed at him with his nose, he confessed the Leap-frog was of good family.
The old councillor, who had had three orders given him to make him hold his tongue, asserted that the Leap-frog was a prophet; for that one could see on his back, if there would be a severe or mild winter, and that was what one could not see even on the back of the man who writes the almanac.
"I say nothing, it is true," exclaimed the King; "but I have my own opinion, notwithstanding.
"
Now the trial was to take place.
The Flea jumped so high that nobody could see where he went to; so they all asserted he had not jumped at all; and that was dishonorable.
The Grasshopper jumped only half as high; but he leaped into the King's face, who said that was ill-mannered.
The Leap-frog stood still for a long time lost in thought; it was believed at last he would not jump at all.
"I only hope he is not unwell," said the house-dog; when, pop!
he made a jump all on one side into the lap of the Princess, who was sitting on a little golden stool close by.
Hereupon the King said, "There is nothing above my daughter; therefore to bound up to her is the highest jump that can be made; but for this, one must possess understanding, and the Leap-frog has shown that he has understanding.
He is brave and intellectual.
"
And so he won the Princess.
"It's all the same to me," said the Flea.
"She may have the old Leap-frog, for all I care.
I jumped the highest; but in this world merit seldom meets its reward.
A fine exterior is what people look at now-a-days.
"
The Flea then went into foreign service, where, it is said, he was killed.
The Grasshopper sat without on a green bank, and reflected on worldly things; and he said too, "Yes, a fine exterior is everything - a fine exterior is what people care about.
" And then he began chirping his peculiar melancholy song, from which we have taken this history; and which may, very possibly, be all untrue, although it does stand here printed in black and white.
Once upon a time there was a little boy who had taken cold.
He had gone out and got his feet wet; though nobody could imagine how it had happened, for it was quite dry weather.
So his mother undressed him, put him to bed, and had the tea-pot brought in, to make him a good cup of Elderflower tea.
Just at that moment the merry old man came in who lived up a-top of the house all alone; for he had neither wife nor children - but he liked children very much, and knew so many fairy tales, that it was quite delightful.
"Now drink your tea," said the boy's mother; "then, perhaps, you may hear a fairy tale.
"
"If I had but something new to tell," said the old man.
"But how did the child get his feet wet?
"
"That is the very thing that nobody can make out," said his mother.
"Am I to hear a fairy tale?
" asked the little boy.
"Yes, if you can tell me exactly - for I must know that first - how deep the gutter is in the little street opposite, that you pass through in going to school.
"
"Just up to the middle of my boot," said the child; "but then I must go into the deep hole.
"
"Ah, ah!
That's where the wet feet came from," said the old man.
"I ought now to tell you a story; but I don't know any more.
"
"You can make one in a moment," said the little boy.
"My mother says that all you look at can be turned into a fairy tale: and that you can find a story in everything.
"
"Yes, but such tales and stories are good for nothing.
The right sort come of themselves; they tap at my forehead and say, 'Here we are.
'"
"Won't there be a tap soon?
" asked the little boy.
And his mother laughed, put some Elder-flowers in the tea-pot, and poured boiling water upon them.
"Do tell me something!
Pray do!
"
"Yes, if a fairy tale would come of its own accord; but they are proud and haughty, and come only when they choose.
Stop!
" said he, all on a sudden.
"I have it!
Pay attention!
There is one in the tea-pot!
"
And the little boy looked at the tea-pot.
The cover rose more and more; and the Elder-flowers came forth so fresh and white, and shot up long branches.
Out of the spout even did they spread themselves on all sides, and grew larger and larger; it was a splendid Elderbush, a whole tree; and it reached into the very bed, and pushed the curtains aside.
How it bloomed!
And what an odour!
In the middle of the bush sat a friendly-looking old woman in a most strange dress.
It was quite green, like the leaves of the elder, and was trimmed with large white Elder-flowers; so that at first one could not tell whether it was a stuff, or a natural green and real flowers.
"What's that woman's name?
" asked the little boy.
"The Greeks and Romans," said the old man, "called her a Dryad; but that we do not understand.
The people who live in the New Booths [*] have a much better name for her; they call her 'old Granny' - and she it is to whom you are to pay attention.
Now listen, and look at the beautiful Elderbush.
* A row of buildings for seamen in Copenhagen.
"Just such another large blooming Elder Tree stands near the New Booths.
It grew there in the corner of a little miserable court-yard; and under it sat, of an afternoon, in the most splendid sunshine, two old people; an old, old seaman, and his old, old wife.
They had great-grand-children, and were soon to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of their marriage; but they could not exactly recollect the date: and old Granny sat in the tree, and looked as pleased as now.
'I know the date,' said she; but those below did not hear her, for they were talking about old times.
"'Yes, can't you remember when we were very little,' said the old seaman, 'and ran and played about?
It was the very same court-yard where we now are, and we stuck slips in the ground, and made a garden.
'
"'I remember it well,' said the old woman; 'I remember it quite well.
We watered the slips, and one of them was an Elderbush.
It took root, put forth green shoots, and grew up to be the large tree under which we old folks are now sitting.
'
"'To be sure,' said he.
'And there in the corner stood a waterpail, where I used to swim my boats.
'
"'True; but first we went to school to learn somewhat,' said she; 'and then we were confirmed.
We both cried; but in the afternoon we went up the Round Tower, and looked down on Copenhagen, and far, far away over the water; then we went to Friedericksberg, where the King and the Queen were sailing about in their splendid barges.
'
"'But I had a different sort of sailing to that, later; and that, too, for many a year; a long way off, on great voyages.
'
"'Yes, many a time have I wept for your sake,' said she.
'I thought you were dead and gone, and lying down in the deep waters.
Many a night have I got up to see if the wind had not changed: and changed it had, sure enough; but you never came.
I remember so well one day, when the rain was pouring down in torrents, the scavengers were before the house where I was in service, and I had come up with the dust, and remained standing at the door - it was dreadful weather - when just as I was there, the postman came and gave me a letter.
It was from you!
What a tour that letter had made!
I opened it instantly and read: I laughed and wept.
I was so happy.
In it I read that you were in warm lands where the coffee-tree grows.
What a blessed land that must be!
You related so much, and I saw it all the while the rain was pouring down, and I standing there with the dust-box.
At the same moment came someone who embraced me.
'
"'Yes; but you gave him a good box on his ear that made it tingle!
'
"'But I did not know it was you.
You arrived as soon as your letter, and you were so handsome - that you still are - and had a long yellow silk handkerchief round your neck, and a bran new hat on; oh, you were so dashing!
Good heavens!
What weather it was, and what a state the street was in!
'
"'And then we married,' said he.
'Don't you remember?
And then we had our first little boy, and then Mary, and Nicholas, and Peter, and Christian.
'
"'Yes, and how they all grew up to be honest people, and were beloved by everybody.
'
"'And their children also have children,' said the old sailor; 'yes, those are our grand-children, full of strength and vigor.
It was, methinks about this season that we had our wedding.
'
"'Yes, this very day is the fiftieth anniversary of the marriage,' said old Granny, sticking her head between the two old people; who thought it was their neighbor who nodded to them.
They looked at each other and held one another by the hand.
Soon after came their children, and their grand-children; for they knew well enough that it was the day of the fiftieth anniversary, and had come with their gratulations that very morning; but the old people had forgotten it, although they were able to remember all that had happened many years ago.
And the Elderbush sent forth a strong odour in the sun, that was just about to set, and shone right in the old people's faces.
They both looked so rosy-cheeked; and the youngest of the grandchildren danced around them, and called out quite delighted, that there was to be something very splendid that evening - they were all to have hot potatoes.
And old Nanny nodded in the bush, and shouted 'hurrah!
' with the rest.
"
"But that is no fairy tale," said the little boy, who was listening to the story.
"The thing is, you must understand it," said the narrator; "let us ask old Nanny.
"
"That was no fairy tale, 'tis true," said old Nanny; "but now it's coming.
The most wonderful fairy tales grow out of that which is reality; were that not the case, you know, my magnificent Elderbush could not have grown out of the tea-pot.
" And then she took the little boy out of bed, laid him on her bosom, and the branches of the Elder Tree, full of flowers, closed around her.
They sat in an aerial dwelling, and it flew with them through the air.
Oh, it was wondrous beautiful!
Old Nanny had grown all of a sudden a young and pretty maiden; but her robe was still the same green stuff with white flowers, which she had worn before.
On her bosom she had a real Elderflower, and in her yellow waving hair a wreath of the flowers; her eyes were so large and blue that it was a pleasure to look at them; she kissed the boy, and now they were of the same age and felt alike.
Hand in hand they went out of the bower, and they were standing in the beautiful garden of their home.
Near the green lawn papa's walking-stick was tied, and for the little ones it seemed to be endowed with life; for as soon as they got astride it, the round polished knob was turned into a magnificent neighing head, a long black mane fluttered in the breeze, and four slender yet strong legs shot out.
The animal was strong and handsome, and away they went at full gallop round the lawn.
"Huzza!
Now we are riding miles off," said the boy.
"We are riding away to the castle where we were last year!
"
And on they rode round the grass-plot; and the little maiden, who, we know, was no one else but old Nanny, kept on crying out, "Now we are in the country!
Don't you see the farm-house yonder?
And there is an Elder Tree standing beside it; and the cock is scraping away the earth for the hens, look, how he struts!
And now we are close to the church.
It lies high upon the hill, between the large oak-trees, one of which is half decayed.
And now we are by the smithy, where the fire is blazing, and where the half-naked men are banging with their hammers till the sparks fly about.
Away!
away!
To the beautiful country-seat!
"
And all that the little maiden, who sat behind on the stick, spoke of, flew by in reality.
The boy saw it all, and yet they were only going round the grass-plot.
Then they played in a side avenue, and marked out a little garden on the earth; and they took Elder-blossoms from their hair, planted them, and they grew just like those the old people planted when they were children, as related before.
They went hand in hand, as the old people had done when they were children; but not to the Round Tower, or to Friedericksberg; no, the little damsel wound her arms round the boy, and then they flew far away through all Denmark.
And spring came, and summer; and then it was autumn, and then winter; and a thousand pictures were reflected in the eye and in the heart of the boy; and the little girl always sang to him, "This you will never forget.
" And during their whole flight the Elder Tree smelt so sweet and odorous; he remarked the roses and the fresh beeches, but the Elder Tree had a more wondrous fragrance, for its flowers hung on the breast of the little maiden; and there, too, did he often lay his head during the flight.
"It is lovely here in spring!
" said the young maiden.
And they stood in a beech-wood that had just put on its first green, where the woodroof [*] at their feet sent forth its fragrance, and the pale-red anemony looked so pretty among the verdure.
"Oh, would it were always spring in the sweetly-smelling Danish beech-forests!
"
* Asperula odorata.
"It is lovely here in summer! "
said she.
And she flew past old castles of by-gone days of chivalry, where the red walls and the embattled gables were mirrored in the canal, where the swans were swimming, and peered up into the old cool avenues.
In the fields the corn was waving like the sea; in the ditches red and yellow flowers were growing; while wild-drone flowers, and blooming convolvuluses were creeping in the hedges; and towards evening the moon rose round and large, and the haycocks in the meadows smelt so sweetly.
"This one never forgets! "
"It is lovely here in autumn! "
said the little maiden.
And suddenly the atmosphere grew as blue again as before; the forest grew red, and green, and yellow-colored.
The dogs came leaping along, and whole flocks of wild-fowl flew over the cairn, where blackberry-bushes were hanging round the old stones.
The sea was dark blue, covered with ships full of white sails; and in the barn old women, maidens, and children were sitting picking hops into a large cask; the young sang songs, but the old told fairy tales of mountain-sprites and soothsayers.
Nothing could be more charming.
"It is delightful here in winter! "
said the little maiden.
And all the trees were covered with hoar-frost; they looked like white corals; the snow crackled under foot, as if one had new boots on; and one falling star after the other was seen in the sky.
The Christmas-tree was lighted in the room; presents were there, and good-humor reigned.
In the country the violin sounded in the room of the peasant; the newly-baked cakes were attacked; even the poorest child said, "It is really delightful here in winter! "
Yes, it was delightful; and the little maiden showed the boy everything; and the Elder Tree still was fragrant, and the red flag, with the white cross, was still waving: the flag under which the old seaman in the New Booths had sailed.
And the boy grew up to be a lad, and was to go forth in the wide world-far, far away to warm lands, where the coffee-tree grows; but at his departure the little maiden took an Elder-blossom from her bosom, and gave it him to keep; and it was placed between the leaves of his Prayer-Book; and when in foreign lands he opened the book, it was always at the place where the keepsake-flower lay; and the more he looked at it, the fresher it became; he felt as it were, the fragrance of the Danish groves; and from among the leaves of the flowers he could distinctly see the little maiden, peeping forth with her bright blue eyes - and then she whispered, "It is delightful here in Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter"; and a hundred visions glided before his mind.
Thus passed many years, and he was now an old man, and sat with his old wife under the blooming tree.
They held each other by the hand, as the old grand-father and grand-mother yonder in the New Booths did, and they talked exactly like them of old times, and of the fiftieth anniversary of their wedding.
The little maiden, with the blue eyes, and with Elder-blossoms in her hair, sat in the tree, nodded to both of them, and said, "To-day is the fiftieth anniversary! "
And then she took two flowers out of her hair, and kissed them.
First, they shone like silver, then like gold; and when they laid them on the heads of the old people, each flower became a golden crown.
So there they both sat, like a king and a queen, under the fragrant tree, that looked exactly like an elder: the old man told his wife the story of "Old Nanny," as it had been told him when a boy.
And it seemed to both of them it contained much that resembled their own history; and those parts that were like it pleased them best.
"Thus it is," said the little maiden in the tree, "some call me 'Old Nanny,' others a 'Dryad,' but, in reality, my name is 'Remembrance'; 'tis I who sit in the tree that grows and grows!
I can remember; I can tell things!
Let me see if you have my flower still? "
And the old man opened his Prayer-Book.
There lay the Elder-blossom, as fresh as if it had been placed there but a short time before; and Remembrance nodded, and the old people, decked with crowns of gold, sat in the flush of the evening sun.
They closed their eyes, and - and - !
Yes, that's the end of the story!
The little boy lay in his bed; he did not know if he had dreamed or not, or if he had been listening while someone told him the story.
The tea-pot was standing on the table, but no Elder Tree was growing out of it!
And the old man, who had been talking, was just on the point of going out at the door, and he did go.
"How splendid that was!
" said the little boy.
"Mother, I have been to warm countries.
"
"So I should think," said his mother. "
When one has drunk two good cupfuls of Elder-flower tea, 'tis likely enough one goes into warm climates"; and she tucked him up nicely, least he should take cold.
"You have had a good sleep while I have been sitting here, and arguing with him whether it was a story or a fairy tale. "
"And where is old Nanny?
" asked the little boy.
"In the tea-pot," said his mother; "and there she may remain.
"
People said "The Evening Bell is sounding, the sun is setting.
" For a strange wondrous tone was heard in the narrow streets of a large town.
It was like the sound of a church-bell: but it was only heard for a moment, for the rolling of the carriages and the voices of the multitude made too great a noise.
Those persons who were walking outside the town, where the houses were farther apart, with gardens or little fields between them, could see the evening sky still better, and heard the sound of the bell much more distinctly.
It was as if the tones came from a church in the still forest; people looked thitherward, and felt their minds attuned most solemnly.
A long time passed, and people said to each other - "I wonder if there is a church out in the wood?
The bell has a tone that is wondrous sweet; let us stroll thither, and examine the matter nearer.
" And the rich people drove out, and the poor walked, but the way seemed strangely long to them; and when they came to a clump of willows which grew on the skirts of the forest, they sat down, and looked up at the long branches, and fancied they were now in the depth of the green wood.
The confectioner of the town came out, and set up his booth there; and soon after came another confectioner, who hung a bell over his stand, as a sign or ornament, but it had no clapper, and it was tarred over to preserve it from the rain.
When all the people returned home, they said it had been very romantic, and that it was quite a different sort of thing to a pic-nic or tea-party.
There were three persons who asserted they had penetrated to the end of the forest, and that they had always heard the wonderful sounds of the bell, but it had seemed to them as if it had come from the town.
One wrote a whole poem about it, and said the bell sounded like the voice of a mother to a good dear child, and that no melody was sweeter than the tones of the bell.
The king of the country was also observant of it, and vowed that he who could discover whence the sounds proceeded, should have the title of "Universal Bell-ringer," even if it were not really a bell.
Many persons now went to the wood, for the sake of getting the place, but one only returned with a sort of explanation; for nobody went far enough, that one not further than the others.
However, he said that the sound proceeded from a very large owl, in a hollow tree; a sort of learned owl, that continually knocked its head against the branches.
But whether the sound came from his head or from the hollow tree, that no one could say with certainty.
So now he got the place of "Universal Bell-ringer," and wrote yearly a short treatise "On the Owl"; but everybody was just as wise as before.
It was the day of confirmation.
The clergyman had spoken so touchingly, the children who were confirmed had been greatly moved; it was an eventful day for them; from children they become all at once grown-up-persons; it was as if their infant souls were now to fly all at once into persons with more understanding.
The sun was shining gloriously; the children that had been confirmed went out of the town; and from the wood was borne towards them the sounds of the unknown bell with wonderful distinctness.
They all immediately felt a wish to go thither; all except three.
One of them had to go home to try on a ball-dress; for it was just the dress and the ball which had caused her to be confirmed this time, for otherwise she would not have come; the other was a poor boy, who had borrowed his coat and boots to be confirmed in from the innkeeper's son, and he was to give them back by a certain hour; the third said that he never went to a strange place if his parents were not with him - that he had always been a good boy hitherto, and would still be so now that he was confirmed, and that one ought not to laugh at him for it: the others, however, did make fun of him, after all.
There were three, therefore, that did not go; the others hastened on.
The sun shone, the birds sang, and the children sang too, and each held the other by the hand; for as yet they had none of them any high office, and were all of equal rank in the eye of God.
But two of the youngest soon grew tired, and both returned to town; two little girls sat down, and twined garlands, so they did not go either; and when the others reached the willow-tree, where the confectioner was, they said, "Now we are there!
In reality the bell does not exist; it is only a fancy that people have taken into their heads!
"
At the same moment the bell sounded deep in the wood, so clear and solemnly that five or six determined to penetrate somewhat further.
It was so thick, and the foliage so dense, that it was quite fatiguing to proceed.
Woodroof and anemonies grew almost too high; blooming convolvuluses and blackberry-bushes hung in long garlands from tree to tree, where the nightingale sang and the sunbeams were playing: it was very beautiful, but it was no place for girls to go; their clothes would get so torn.
Large blocks of stone lay there, overgrown with moss of every color; the fresh spring bubbled forth, and made a strange gurgling sound.
"That surely cannot be the bell," said one of the children, lying down and listening.
"This must be looked to.
" So he remained, and let the others go on without him.
They afterwards came to a little house, made of branches and the bark of trees; a large wild apple-tree bent over it, as if it would shower down all its blessings on the roof, where roses were blooming.
The long stems twined round the gable, on which there hung a small bell.
Was it that which people had heard?
Yes, everybody was unanimous on the subject, except one, who said that the bell was too small and too fine to be heard at so great a distance, and besides it was very different tones to those that could move a human heart in such a manner.
It was a king's son who spoke; whereon the others said, "Such people always want to be wiser than everybody else.
"
They now let him go on alone; and as he went, his breast was filled more and more with the forest solitude; but he still heard the little bell with which the others were so satisfied, and now and then, when the wind blew, he could also hear the people singing who were sitting at tea where the confectioner had his tent; but the deep sound of the bell rose louder; it was almost as if an organ were accompanying it, and the tones came from the left hand, the side where the heart is placed.
A rustling was heard in the bushes, and a little boy stood before the King's Son, a boy in wooden shoes, and with so short a jacket that one could see what long wrists he had.
Both knew each other: the boy was that one among the children who could not come because he had to go home and return his jacket and boots to the innkeeper's son.
This he had done, and was now going on in wooden shoes and in his humble dress, for the bell sounded with so deep a tone, and with such strange power, that proceed he must.
"Why, then, we can go together," said the King's Son.
But the poor child that had been confirmed was quite ashamed; he looked at his wooden shoes, pulled at the short sleeves of his jacket, and said that he was afraid he could not walk so fast; besides, he thought that the bell must be looked for to the right; for that was the place where all sorts of beautiful things were to be found.
"But there we shall not meet," said the King's Son, nodding at the same time to the poor boy, who went into the darkest, thickest part of the wood, where thorns tore his humble dress, and scratched his face and hands and feet till they bled.
The King's Son got some scratches too; but the sun shone on his path, and it is him that we will follow, for he was an excellent and resolute youth.
"I must and will find the bell," said he, "even if I am obliged to go to the end of the world.
"
The ugly apes sat upon the trees, and grinned.
"Shall we thrash him?
" said they.
"Shall we thrash him?
He is the son of a king!
"
But on he went, without being disheartened, deeper and deeper into the wood, where the most wonderful flowers were growing.
There stood white lilies with blood-red stamina, skyblue tulips, which shone as they waved in the winds, and apple-trees, the apples of which looked exactly like large soapbubbles: so only think how the trees must have sparkled in the sunshine!
Around the nicest green meads, where the deer were playing in the grass, grew magnificent oaks and beeches; and if the bark of one of the trees was cracked, there grass and long creeping plants grew in the crevices.
And there were large calm lakes there too, in which white swans were swimming, and beat the air with their wings.
The King's Son often stood still and listened.
He thought the bell sounded from the depths of these still lakes; but then he remarked again that the tone proceeded not from there, but farther off, from out the depths of the forest.
The sun now set: the atmosphere glowed like fire.
It was still in the woods, so very still; and he fell on his knees, sung his evening hymn, and said: "I cannot find what I seek; the sun is going down, and night is coming - the dark, dark night.
Yet perhaps I may be able once more to see the round red sun before he entirely disappears.
I will climb up yonder rock.
"
And he seized hold of the creeping-plants, and the roots of trees - climbed up the moist stones where the water-snakes were writhing and the toads were croaking - and he gained the summit before the sun had quite gone down.
How magnificent was the sight from this height!
The sea - the great, the glorious sea, that dashed its long waves against the coast - was stretched out before him.
And yonder, where sea and sky meet, stood the sun, like a large shining altar, all melted together in the most glowing colors.
And the wood and the sea sang a song of rejoicing, and his heart sang with the rest: all nature was a vast holy church, in which the trees and the buoyant clouds were the pillars, flowers and grass the velvet carpeting, and heaven itself the large cupola.
The red colors above faded away as the sun vanished, but a million stars were lighted, a million lamps shone; and the King's Son spread out his arms towards heaven, and wood, and sea; when at the same moment, coming by a path to the right, appeared, in his wooden shoes and jacket, the poor boy who had been confirmed with him.
He had followed his own path, and had reached the spot just as soon as the son of the king had done.
They ran towards each other, and stood together hand in hand in the vast church of nature and of poetry, while over them sounded the invisible holy bell: blessed spirits floated around them, and lifted up their voices in a rejoicing hallelujah!
In the street, up there, was an old, a very old house - it was almost three hundred years old, for that might be known by reading the great beam on which the date of the year was carved: together with tulips and hop-binds there were whole verses spelled as in former times, and over every window was a distorted face cut out in the beam.
The one story stood forward a great way over the other; and directly under the eaves was a leaden spout with a dragon's head; the rain-water should have run out of the mouth, but it ran out of the belly, for there was a hole in the spout.
All the other houses in the street were so new and so neat, with large window panes and smooth walls, one could easily see that they would have nothing to do with the old house: they certainly thought, "How long is that old decayed thing to stand here as a spectacle in the street?
And then the projecting windows stand so far out, that no one can see from our windows what happens in that direction!
The steps are as broad as those of a palace, and as high as to a church tower.
The iron railings look just like the door to an old family vault, and then they have brass tops - that's so stupid! "
On the other side of the street were also new and neat houses, and they thought just as the others did; but at the window opposite the old house there sat a little boy with fresh rosy cheeks and bright beaming eyes: he certainly liked the old house best, and that both in sunshine and moonshine.
And when he looked across at the wall where the mortar had fallen out, he could sit and find out there the strangest figures imaginable; exactly as the street had appeared before, with steps, projecting windows, and pointed gables; he could see soldiers with halberds, and spouts where the water ran, like dragons and serpents.
That was a house to look at; and there lived an old man, who wore plush breeches; and he had a coat with large brass buttons, and a wig that one could see was a real wig.
Every morning there came an old fellow to him who put his rooms in order, and went on errands; otherwise, the old man in the plush breeches was quite alone in the old house.
Now and then he came to the window and looked out, and the little boy nodded to him, and the old man nodded again, and so they became acquaintances, and then they were friends, although they had never spoken to each other - but that made no difference.
The little boy heard his parents say, "The old man opposite is very well off, but he is so very, very lonely! "
The Sunday following, the little boy took something, and wrapped it up in a piece of paper, went downstairs, and stood in the doorway; and when the man who went on errands came past, he said to him -
"I say, master!
will you give this to the old man over the way from me?
I have two pewter soldiers - this is one of them, and he shall have it, for I know he is so very, very lonely.
"
And the old errand man looked quite pleased, nodded, and took the pewter soldier over to the old house.
Afterwards there came a message; it was to ask if the little boy himself had not a wish to come over and pay a visit; and so he got permission of his parents, and then went over to the old house.
And the brass balls on the iron railings shone much brighter than ever; one would have thought they were polished on account of the visit; and it was as if the carved-out trumpeters - for there were trumpeters, who stood in tulips, carved out on the door - blew with all their might, their cheeks appeared so much rounder than before.
Yes, they blew - "Trateratra!
The little boy comes!
Trateratra! " -
and then the door opened.
The whole passage was hung with portraits of knights in armor, and ladies in silken gowns; and the armor rattled, and the silken gowns rustled!
And then there was a flight of stairs which went a good way upwards, and a little way downwards, and then one came on a balcony which was in a very dilapidated state, sure enough, with large holes and long crevices, but grass grew there and leaves out of them altogether, for the whole balcony outside, the yard, and the walls, were overgrown with so much green stuff, that it looked like a garden; only a balcony.
Here stood old flower-pots with faces and asses' ears, and the flowers grew just as they liked.
One of the pots was quite overrun on all sides with pinks, that is to say, with the green part; shoot stood by shoot, and it said quite distinctly, "The air has cherished me, the sun has kissed me, and promised me a little flower on Sunday!
a little flower on Sunday! "
And then they entered a chamber where the walls were covered with hog's leather, and printed with gold flowers.
"The gilding decays,
But hog's leather stays!
"
said the walls.
And there stood easy-chairs, with such high backs, and so carved out, and with arms on both sides.
"Sit down!
sit down!
" said they.
"Ugh!
how I creak; now I shall certainly get the gout, like the old clothespress, ugh!
"
And then the little boy came into the room where the projecting windows were, and where the old man sat.
"I thank you for the pewter soldier, my little friend!
" said the old man.
"And I thank you because you come over to me.
"
"Thankee!
thankee!
" or "cranky!
cranky!
" sounded from all the furniture; there was so much of it, that each article stood in the other's way, to get a look at the little boy.
In the middle of the wall hung a picture representing a beautiful lady, so young, so glad, but dressed quite as in former times, with clothes that stood quite stiff, and with powder in her hair; she neither said "thankee, thankee! "
nor "cranky, cranky!
" but looked with her mild eyes at the little boy, who directly asked the old man, "Where did you get her? "
"Yonder, at the broker's," said the old man, "where there are so many pictures hanging.
No one knows or cares about them, for they are all of them buried; but I knew her in by-gone days, and now she has been dead and gone these fifty years!
"
Under the picture, in a glazed frame, there hung a bouquet of withered flowers; they were almost fifty years old; they looked so very old!
The pendulum of the great clock went to and fro, and the hands turned, and everything in the room became still older; but they did not observe it.
"They say at home," said the little boy, "that you are so very, very lonely!
"
"Oh!
" said he.
"The old thoughts, with what they may bring with them, come and visit me, and now you also come!
I am very well off!
"
Then he took a book with pictures in it down from the shelf; there were whole long processions and pageants, with the strangest characters, which one never sees now-a-days; soldiers like the knave of clubs, and citizens with waving flags: the tailors had theirs, with a pair of shears held by two lions - and the shoemakers theirs, without boots, but with an eagle that had two heads, for the shoemakers must have everything so that they can say, it is a pair!
Yes, that was a picture book!
The old man now went into the other room to fetch preserves, apples, and nuts - yes, it was delightful over there in the old house.
"I cannot bear it any longer! "
said the pewter soldier, who sat on the drawers. "
It is so lonely and melancholy here!
But when one has been in a family circle one cannot accustom oneself to this life!
I cannot bear it any longer!
The whole day is so long, and the evenings are still longer!
Here it is not at all as it is over the way at your home, where your father and mother spoke so pleasantly, and where you and all your sweet children made such a delightful noise.
Nay, how lonely the old man is - do you think that he gets kisses?
Do you think he gets mild eyes, or a Christmas tree?
He will get nothing but a grave!
I can bear it no longer! "
"You must not let it grieve you so much," said the little boy.
"I find it so very delightful here, and then all the old thoughts, with what they may bring with them, they come and visit here.
"
"Yes, it's all very well, but I see nothing of them, and I don't know them!
" said the pewter soldier.
"I cannot bear it!
"
"But you must!
" said the little boy.
Then in came the old man with the most pleased and happy face, the most delicious preserves, apples, and nuts, and so the little boy thought no more about the pewter soldier.
The little boy returned home happy and pleased, and weeks and days passed away, and nods were made to the old house, and from the old house, and then the little boy went over there again.
The carved trumpeters blew, "Trateratra!
There is the little boy!
Trateratra! "
and the swords and armor on the knights' portraits rattled, and the silk gowns rustled; the hog's leather spoke, and the old chairs had the gout in their legs and rheumatism in their backs: Ugh!
it was exactly like the first time, for over there one day and hour was just like another.
"I cannot bear it! "
said the pewter soldier. "
I have shed pewter tears!
It is too melancholy!
Rather let me go to the wars and lose arms and legs!
It would at least be a change.
I cannot bear it longer!
Now, I know what it is to have a visit from one's old thoughts, with what they may bring with them!
I have had a visit from mine, and you may be sure it is no pleasant thing in the end; I was at last about to jump down from the drawers.
"I saw you all over there at home so distinctly, as if you really were here; it was again that Sunday morning; all you children stood before the table and sung your Psalms, as you do every morning.
You stood devoutly with folded hands; and father and mother were just as pious; and then the door was opened, and little sister Mary, who is not two years old yet, and who always dances when she hears music or singing, of whatever kind it may be, was put into the room - though she ought not to have been there - and then she began to dance, but could not keep time, because the tones were so long; and then she stood, first on the one leg, and bent her head forwards, and then on the other leg, and bent her head forwards - but all would not do.
You stood very seriously all together, although it was difficult enough; but I laughed to myself, and then I fell off the table, and got a bump, which I have still - for it was not right of me to laugh.
But the whole now passes before me again in thought, and everything that I have lived to see; and these are the old thoughts, with what they may bring with them.
"Tell me if you still sing on Sundays?
Tell me something about little Mary!
And how my comrade, the other pewter soldier, lives!
Yes, he is happy enough, that's sure!
I cannot bear it any longer!
"
"You are given away as a present!
" said the little boy.
"You must remain.
Can you not understand that?
"
The old man now came with a drawer, in which there was much to be seen, both "tin boxes" and "balsam boxes," old cards, so large and so gilded, such as one never sees them now.
And several drawers were opened, and the piano was opened; it had landscapes on the inside of the lid, and it was so hoarse when the old man played on it!
and then he hummed a song.
"Yes, she could sing that!
" said he, and nodded to the portrait, which he had bought at the broker's, and the old man's eyes shone so bright!
"I will go to the wars!
I will go to the wars! "
shouted the pewter soldier as loud as he could, and threw himself off the drawers right down on the floor.
What became of him?
The old man sought, and the little boy sought; he was away, and he stayed away.
"I shall find him!
" said the old man; but he never found him.
The floor was too open - the pewter soldier had fallen through a crevice, and there he lay as in an open tomb.
That day passed, and the little boy went home, and that week passed, and several weeks too.
The windows were quite frozen, the little boy was obliged to sit and breathe on them to get a peep-hole over to the old house, and there the snow had been blown into all the carved work and inscriptions; it lay quite up over the steps, just as if there was no one at home - nor was there any one at home - the old man was dead!
In the evening there was a hearse seen before the door, and he was borne into it in his coffin: he was now to go out into the country, to lie in his grave.
He was driven out there, but no one followed; all his friends were dead, and the little boy kissed his hand to the coffin as it was driven away.
Some days afterwards there was an auction at the old house, and the little boy saw from his window how they carried the old knights and the old ladies away, the flower-pots with the long ears, the old chairs, and the old clothes-presses.
Something came here, and something came there; the portrait of her who had been found at the broker's came to the broker's again; and there it hung, for no one knew her more - no one cared about the old picture.
In the spring they pulled the house down, for, as people said, it was a ruin.
One could see from the street right into the room with the hog's-leather hanging, which was slashed and torn; and the green grass and leaves about the balcony hung quite wild about the falling beams.
And then it was put to rights.
"That was a relief," said the neighboring houses.
A fine house was built there, with large windows, and smooth white walls; but before it, where the old house had in fact stood, was a little garden laid out, and a wild grapevine ran up the wall of the neighboring house.
Before the garden there was a large iron railing with an iron door, it looked quite splendid, and people stood still and peeped in, and the sparrows hung by scores in the vine, and chattered away at each other as well as they could, but it was not about the old house, for they could not remember it, so many years had passed - so many that the little boy had grown up to a whole man, yes, a clever man, and a pleasure to his parents; and he had just been married, and, together with his little wife, had come to live in the house here, where the garden was; and he stood by her there whilst she planted a field-flower that she found so pretty; she planted it with her little hand, and pressed the earth around it with her fingers.
Oh!
what was that?
She had stuck herself.
There sat something pointed, straight out of the soft mould.
It was - yes, guess!
It was the pewter soldier, he that was lost up at the old man's, and had tumbled and turned about amongst the timber and the rubbish, and had at last laid for many years in the ground.
The young wife wiped the dirt off the soldier, first with a green leaf, and then with her fine handkerchief - it had such a delightful smell, that it was to the pewter soldier just as if he had awaked from a trance.
"Let me see him," said the young man.
He laughed, and then shook his head. "
Nay, it cannot be he; but he reminds me of a story about a pewter soldier which I had when I was a little boy!
" And then he told his wife about the old house, and the old man, and about the pewter soldier that he sent over to him because he was so very, very lonely; and he told it as correctly as it had really been, so that the tears came into the eyes of his young wife, on account of the old house and the old man.
"It may possibly be, however, that it is the same pewter soldier!
" said she.
"I will take care of it, and remember all that you have told me; but you must show me the old man's grave!
"
"But I do not know it," said he, "and no one knows it!
All his friends were dead, no one took care of it, and I was then a little boy!
"
"How very, very lonely he must have been!
" said she.
"Very, very lonely!
" said the pewter soldier.
"But it is delightful not to be forgotten!
"
"Delightful!
" shouted something close by; but no one, except the pewter soldier, saw that it was a piece of the hog's-leather hangings; it had lost all its gilding, it looked like a piece of wet clay, but it had an opinion, and it gave it:
"The gilding decays,
But hog's leather stays!
"
This the pewter soldier did not believe.
It is in the hot lands that the sun burns, sure enough!
there the people become quite a mahogany brown, ay, and in the HOTTEST lands they are burnt to Negroes.
But now it was only to the HOT lands that a learned man had come from the cold; there he thought that he could run about just as when at home, but he soon found out his mistake.
He, and all sensible folks, were obliged to stay within doors - the window-shutters and doors were closed the whole day; it looked as if the whole house slept, or there was no one at home.
The narrow street with the high houses, was built so that the sunshine must fall there from morning till evening - it was really not to be borne.
The learned man from the cold lands - he was a young man, and seemed to be a clever man - sat in a glowing oven; it took effect on him, he became quite meagre - even his shadow shrunk in, for the sun had also an effect on it.
It was first towards evening when the sun was down, that they began to freshen up again.
In the warm lands every window has a balcony, and the people came out on all the balconies in the street - for one must have air, even if one be accustomed to be mahogany!
It was lively both up and down the street.
Tailors, and shoemakers, and all the folks, moved out into the street - chairs and tables were brought forth - and candles burnt - yes, above a thousand lights were burning - and the one talked and the other sung; and people walked and church-bells rang, and asses went along with a dingle-dingle-dong!
for they too had bells on.
The street boys were screaming and hooting, and shouting and shooting, with devils and detonating balls - and there came corpse bearers and hood wearers - for there were funerals with psalm and hymn - and then the din of carriages driving and company arriving: yes, it was, in truth, lively enough down in the street.
Only in that single house, which stood opposite that in which the learned foreigner lived, it was quite still; and yet some one lived there, for there stood flowers in the balcony - they grew so well in the sun's heat!
and that they could not do unless they were watered - and some one must water them - there must be somebody there.
The door opposite was also opened late in the evening, but it was dark within, at least in the front room; further in there was heard the sound of music.
The learned foreigner thought it quite marvellous, but now - it might be that he only imagined it - for he found everything marvellous out there, in the warm lands, if there had only been no sun.
The stranger's landlord said that he didn't know who had taken the house opposite, one saw no person about, and as to the music, it appeared to him to be extremely tiresome.
"It is as if some one sat there, and practised a piece that he could not master - always the same piece.
'I shall master it!
' says he; but yet he cannot master it, however long he plays.
"
One night the stranger awoke - he slept with the doors of the balcony open - the curtain before it was raised by the wind, and he thought that a strange lustre came from the opposite neighbor's house; all the flowers shone like flames, in the most beautiful colors, and in the midst of the flowers stood a slender, graceful maiden - it was as if she also shone; the light really hurt his eyes.
He now opened them quite wide - yes, he was quite awake; with one spring he was on the floor; he crept gently behind the curtain, but the maiden was gone; the flowers shone no longer, but there they stood, fresh and blooming as ever; the door was ajar, and, far within, the music sounded so soft and delightful, one could really melt away in sweet thoughts from it.
Yet it was like a piece of enchantment.
And who lived there?
Where was the actual entrance?
The whole of the ground-floor was a row of shops, and there people could not always be running through.
One evening the stranger sat out on the balcony.
The light burnt in the room behind him; and thus it was quite natural that his shadow should fall on his opposite neighbor's wall.
Yes!
there it sat, directly opposite, between the flowers on the balcony; and when the stranger moved, the shadow also moved: for that it always does.
"I think my shadow is the only living thing one sees over there," said the learned man.
"See, how nicely it sits between the flowers.
The door stands half-open: now the shadow should be cunning, and go into the room, look about, and then come and tell me what it had seen.
Come, now!
Be useful, and do me a service," said he, in jest.
"Have the kindness to step in.
Now!
Art thou going?
" and then he nodded to the shadow, and the shadow nodded again.
"Well then, go!
But don't stay away.
"
The stranger rose, and his shadow on the opposite neighbor's balcony rose also; the stranger turned round and the shadow also turned round.
Yes!
if anyone had paid particular attention to it, they would have seen, quite distinctly, that the shadow went in through the half-open balcony-door of their opposite neighbor, just as the stranger went into his own room, and let the long curtain fall down after him.
Next morning, the learned man went out to drink coffee and read the newspapers.
"What is that?
" said he, as he came out into the sunshine.
"I have no shadow!
So then, it has actually gone last night, and not come again.
It is really tiresome!
"
This annoyed him: not so much because the shadow was gone, but because he knew there was a story about a man without a shadow.
* It was known to everybody at home, in the cold lands; and if the learned man now came there and told his story, they would say that he was imitating it, and that he had no need to do.
He would, therefore, not talk about it at all; and that was wisely thought.
*Peter Schlemihl, the shadowless man.
In the evening he went out again on the balcony.
He had placed the light directly behind him, for he knew that the shadow would always have its master for a screen, but he could not entice it.
He made himself little; he made himself great: but no shadow came again.
He said, "Hem!
hem!
" but it was of no use.
It was vexatious; but in the warm lands everything grows so quickly; and after the lapse of eight days he observed, to his great joy, that a new shadow came in the sunshine.
In the course of three weeks he had a very fair shadow, which, when he set out for his home in the northern lands, grew more and more in the journey, so that at last it was so long and so large, that it was more than sufficient.
The learned man then came home, and he wrote books about what was true in the world, and about what was good and what was beautiful; and there passed days and years - yes!
many years passed away.
One evening, as he was sitting in his room, there was a gentle knocking at the door.
"Come in!
" said he; but no one came in; so he opened the door, and there stood before him such an extremely lean man, that he felt quite strange.
As to the rest, the man was very finely dressed - he must be a gentleman.
"Whom have I the honor of speaking?
" asked the learned man.
"Yes!
I thought as much," said the fine man.
"I thought you would not know me.
I have got so much body.
I have even got flesh and clothes.
You certainly never thought of seeing me so well off.
Do you not know your old shadow?
You certainly thought I should never more return.
Things have gone on well with me since I was last with you.
I have, in all respects, become very well off.
Shall I purchase my freedom from service?
If so, I can do it"; and then he rattled a whole bunch of valuable seals that hung to his watch, and he stuck his hand in the thick gold chain he wore around his neck - nay!
how all his fingers glittered with diamond rings; and then all were pure gems.
"Nay; I cannot recover from my surprise!
" said the learned man.
"What is the meaning of all this?
"
"Something common, is it not," said the shadow.
"But you yourself do not belong to the common order; and I, as you know well, have from a child followed in your footsteps.
As soon as you found I was capable to go out alone in the world, I went my own way.
I am in the most brilliant circumstances, but there came a sort of desire over me to see you once more before you die; you will die, I suppose?
I also wished to see this land again - for you know we always love our native land.
I know you have got another shadow again; have I anything to pay to it or you?
If so, you will oblige me by saying what it is.
"
"Nay, is it really thou?
" said the learned man.
"It is most remarkable: I never imagined that one's old shadow could come again as a man.
"
"Tell me what I have to pay," said the shadow; "for I don't like to be in any sort of debt.
"
"How canst thou talk so?
" said the learned man.
"What debt is there to talk about?
Make thyself as free as anyone else.
I am extremely glad to hear of thy good fortune: sit down, old friend, and tell me a little how it has gone with thee, and what thou hast seen at our opposite neighbor's there - in the warm lands.
"
"Yes, I will tell you all about it," said the shadow, and sat down: "but then you must also promise me, that, wherever you may meet me, you will never say to anyone here in the town that I have been your shadow.
I intend to get betrothed, for I can provide for more than one family.
"
"Be quite at thy ease about that," said the learned man; "I shall not say to anyone who thou actually art: here is my hand - I promise it, and a man's bond is his word.
"
"A word is a shadow," said the shadow, "and as such it must speak.
"
It was really quite astonishing how much of a man it was.
It was dressed entirely in black, and of the very finest cloth; it had patent leather boots, and a hat that could be folded together, so that it was bare crown and brim; not to speak of what we already know it had - seals, gold neck-chain, and diamond rings; yes, the shadow was well-dressed, and it was just that which made it quite a man.
"Now I shall tell you my adventures," said the shadow; and then he sat, with the polished boots, as heavily as he could, on the arm of the learned man's new shadow, which lay like a poodle-dog at his feet.
Now this was perhaps from arrogance; and the shadow on the ground kept itself so still and quiet, that it might hear all that passed: it wished to know how it could get free, and work its way up, so as to become its own master.
"Do you know who lived in our opposite neighbor's house?
" said the shadow.
"It was the most charming of all beings, it was Poesy!
I was there for three weeks, and that has as much effect as if one had lived three thousand years, and read all that was composed and written; that is what I say, and it is right.
I have seen everything and I know everything!
"
"Poesy!
" cried the learned man.
"Yes, yes, she often dwells a recluse in large cities!
Poesy!
Yes, I have seen her - a single short moment, but sleep came into my eyes!
She stood on the balcony and shone as the Aurora Borealis shines.
Go on, go on - thou wert on the balcony, and went through the doorway, and then - "
"Then I was in the antechamber," said the shadow.
"You always sat and looked over to the antechamber.
There was no light; there was a sort of twilight, but the one door stood open directly opposite the other through a long row of rooms and saloons, and there it was lighted up.
I should have been completely killed if I had gone over to the maiden; but I was circumspect, I took time to think, and that one must always do.
"
"And what didst thou then see?
" asked the learned man.
"I saw everything, and I shall tell all to you: but - it is no pride on my part - as a free man, and with the knowledge I have, not to speak of my position in life, my excellent circumstances - I certainly wish that you would say YOU to me!
"
"I beg your pardon," said the learned man; "it is an old habit with me.
YOU are perfectly right, and I shall remember it; but now you must tell me all YOU saw!
"
"Everything!
" said the shadow.
"For I saw everything, and I know everything!
"
"How did it look in the furthest saloon?
" asked the learned man.
"Was it there as in the fresh woods?
Was it there as in a holy church?
Were the saloons like the starlit firmament when we stand on the high mountains?
"
"Everything was there!
" said the shadow.
"I did not go quite in, I remained in the foremost room, in the twilight, but I stood there quite well; I saw everything, and I know everything!
I have been in the antechamber at the court of Poesy.
"
"But WHAT DID you see?
Did all the gods of the olden times pass through the large saloons?
Did the old heroes combat there?
Did sweet children play there, and relate their dreams?
"
"I tell you I was there, and you can conceive that I saw everything there was to be seen.
Had you come over there, you would not have been a man; but I became so!
And besides, I learned to know my inward nature, my innate qualities, the relationship I had with Poesy.
At the time I was with you, I thought not of that, but always - you know it well - when the sun rose, and when the sun went down, I became so strangely great; in the moonlight I was very near being more distinct than yourself; at that time I did not understand my nature; it was revealed to me in the antechamber!
I became a man!
I came out matured; but you were no longer in the warm lands; as a man I was ashamed to go as I did.
I was in want of boots, of clothes, of the whole human varnish that makes a man perceptible.
I took my way - I tell it to you, but you will not put it in any book - I took my way to the cake woman - I hid myself behind her; the woman didn't think how much she concealed.
I went out first in the evening; I ran about the streets in the moonlight; I made myself long up the walls - it tickles the back so delightfully!
I ran up, and ran down, peeped into the highest windows, into the saloons, and on the roofs, I peeped in where no one could peep, and I saw what no one else saw, what no one else should see!
This is, in fact, a base world!
I would not be a man if it were not now once accepted and regarded as something to be so!
I saw the most unimaginable things with the women, with the men, with parents, and with the sweet, matchless children; I saw," said the shadow, "what no human being must know, but what they would all so willingly know - what is bad in their neighbor.
Had I written a newspaper, it would have been read!
But I wrote direct to the persons themselves, and there was consternation in all the towns where I came.
They were so afraid of me, and yet they were so excessively fond of me.
The professors made a professor of me; the tailors gave me new clothes - I am well furnished; the master of the mint struck new coin for me, and the women said I was so handsome!
And so I became the man I am.
And I now bid you farewell.
Here is my card - I live on the sunny side of the street, and am always at home in rainy weather!
" And so away went the shadow.
"That was most extraordinary!
" said the learned man.
Years and days passed away, then the shadow came again.
"How goes it?
" said the shadow.
"Alas!
" said the learned man.
"I write about the true, and the good, and the beautiful, but no one cares to hear such things; I am quite desperate, for I take it so much to heart!
"
"But I don't!
" said the shadow.
"I become fat, and it is that one wants to become!
You do not understand the world.
You will become ill by it.
You must travel!
I shall make a tour this summer; will you go with me?
I should like to have a travelling companion!
Will you go with me, as shadow?
It will be a great pleasure for me to have you with me; I shall pay the travelling expenses!
"
"Nay, this is too much!
" said the learned man.
"It is just as one takes it!
" said the shadow.
"It will do you much good to travel!
Will you be my shadow?
You shall have everything free on the journey!
"
"Nay, that is too bad!
" said the learned man.
"But it is just so with the world!
" said the shadow, "and so it will be!
" and away it went again.
The learned man was not at all in the most enviable state; grief and torment followed him, and what he said about the true, and the good, and the beautiful, was, to most persons, like roses for a cow!
He was quite ill at last.
"You really look like a shadow!
" said his friends to him; and the learned man trembled, for he thought of it.
"You must go to a watering-place!
" said the shadow, who came and visited him.
"There is nothing else for it!
I will take you with me for old acquaintance' sake; I will pay the travelling expenses, and you write the descriptions - and if they are a little amusing for me on the way!
I will go to a watering-place - my beard does not grow out as it ought - that is also a sickness - and one must have a beard!
Now you be wise and accept the offer; we shall travel as comrades!
"
And so they travelled; the shadow was master, and the master was the shadow; they drove with each other, they rode and walked together, side by side, before and behind, just as the sun was; the shadow always took care to keep itself in the master's place.
Now the learned man didn't think much about that; he was a very kind-hearted man, and particularly mild and friendly, and so he said one day to the shadow: "As we have now become companions, and in this way have grown up together from childhood, shall we not drink 'thou' together, it is more familiar?
"
"You are right," said the shadow, who was now the proper master.
"It is said in a very straight-forward and well-meant manner.
You, as a learned man, certainly know how strange nature is.
Some persons cannot bear to touch grey paper, or they become ill; others shiver in every limb if one rub a pane of glass with a nail: I have just such a feeling on hearing you say thou to me; I feel myself as if pressed to the earth in my first situation with you.
You see that it is a feeling; that it is not pride: I cannot allow you to say THOU to me, but I will willingly say THOU to you, so it is half done!
"
So the shadow said THOU to its former master.
"This is rather too bad," thought he, "that I must say YOU and he say THOU," but he was now obliged to put up with it.
So they came to a watering-place where there were many strangers, and amongst them was a princess, who was troubled with seeing too well; and that was so alarming!
She directly observed that the stranger who had just come was quite a different sort of person to all the others; "He has come here in order to get his beard to grow, they say, but I see the real cause, he cannot cast a shadow.
"
She had become inquisitive; and so she entered into conversation directly with the strange gentleman, on their promenades.
As the daughter of a king, she needed not to stand upon trifles, so she said, "Your complaint is, that you cannot cast a shadow?
"
"Your Royal Highness must be improving considerably," said the shadow, "I know your complaint is, that you see too clearly, but it has decreased, you are cured.
I just happen to have a very unusual shadow!
Do you not see that person who always goes with me?
Other persons have a common shadow, but I do not like what is common to all.
We give our servants finer cloth for their livery than we ourselves use, and so I had my shadow trimmed up into a man: yes, you see I have even given him a shadow.
It is somewhat expensive, but I like to have something for myself!
"
"What!
" thought the princess.
"Should I really be cured!
These baths are the first in the world!
In our time water has wonderful powers.
But I shall not leave the place, for it now begins to be amusing here.
I am extremely fond of that stranger: would that his beard should not grow, for in that case he will leave us!
"
In the evening, the princess and the shadow danced together in the large ball-room.
She was light, but he was still lighter; she had never had such a partner in the dance.
She told him from what land she came, and he knew that land; he had been there, but then she was not at home; he had peeped in at the window, above and below - he had seen both the one and the other, and so he could answer the princess, and make insinuations, so that she was quite astonished; he must be the wisest man in the whole world!
She felt such respect for what he knew!
So that when they again danced together she fell in love with him; and that the shadow could remark, for she almost pierced him through with her eyes.
So they danced once more together; and she was about to declare herself, but she was discreet; she thought of her country and kingdom, and of the many persons she would have to reign over.
"He is a wise man," said she to herself - "It is well; and he dances delightfully - that is also good; but has he solid knowledge?
That is just as important!
He must be examined.
"
So she began, by degrees, to question him about the most difficult things she could think of, and which she herself could not have answered; so that the shadow made a strange face.
"You cannot answer these questions?
" said the princess.
"They belong to my childhood's learning," said the shadow.
"I really believe my shadow, by the door there, can answer them!
"
"Your shadow!
" said the princess.
"That would indeed be marvellous!
"
"I will not say for a certainty that he can," said the shadow, "but I think so; he has now followed me for so many years, and listened to my conversation - I should think it possible.
But your royal highness will permit me to observe, that he is so proud of passing himself off for a man, that when he is to be in a proper humor - and he must be so to answer well - he must be treated quite like a man.
"
"Oh!
I like that!
" said the princess.
So she went to the learned man by the door, and she spoke to him about the sun and the moon, and about persons out of and in the world, and he answered with wisdom and prudence.
"What a man that must be who has so wise a shadow!
" thought she.
"It will be a real blessing to my people and kingdom if I choose him for my consort - I will do it!
"
They were soon agreed, both the princess and the shadow; but no one was to know about it before she arrived in her own kingdom.
"No one - not even my shadow!
" said the shadow, and he had his own thoughts about it!
Now they were in the country where the princess reigned when she was at home.
"Listen, my good friend," said the shadow to the learned man.
"I have now become as happy and mighty as anyone can be; I will, therefore, do something particular for thee!
Thou shalt always live with me in the palace, drive with me in my royal carriage, and have ten thousand pounds a year; but then thou must submit to be called SHADOW by all and everyone; thou must not say that thou hast ever been a man; and once a year, when I sit on the balcony in the sunshine, thou must lie at my feet, as a shadow shall do!
I must tell thee: I am going to marry the king's daughter, and the nuptials are to take place this evening!
"
"Nay, this is going too far!
" said the learned man.
"I will not have it; I will not do it!
It is to deceive the whole country and the princess too!
I will tell everything!
That I am a man, and that thou art a shadow - thou art only dressed up!
"
"There is no one who will believe it!
" said the shadow.
"Be reasonable, or I will call the guard!
"
"I will go directly to the princess!
" said the learned man.
"But I will go first!
" said the shadow.
"And thou wilt go to prison!
" and that he was obliged to do - for the sentinels obeyed him whom they knew the king's daughter was to marry.
"You tremble!
" said the princess, as the shadow came into her chamber.
"Has anything happened?
You must not be unwell this evening, now that we are to have our nuptials celebrated.
"
"I have lived to see the most cruel thing that anyone can live to see!
" said the shadow.
"Only imagine - yes, it is true, such a poor shadow-skull cannot bear much - only think, my shadow has become mad; he thinks that he is a man, and that I - now only think - that I am his shadow!
"
"It is terrible!
" said the princess; "but he is confined, is he not?
"
"That he is.
I am afraid that he will never recover.
"
"Poor shadow!
" said the princess.
"He is very unfortunate; it would be a real work of charity to deliver him from the little life he has, and, when I think properly over the matter, I am of opinion that it will be necessary to do away with him in all stillness!
"
"It is certainly hard," said the shadow, "for he was a faithful servant!
" and then he gave a sort of sigh.
"You are a noble character!
" said the princess.
The whole city was illuminated in the evening, and the cannons went off with a bum!
bum!
and the soldiers presented arms.
That was a marriage!
The princess and the shadow went out on the balcony to show themselves, and get another hurrah!
The learned man heard nothing of all this - for they had deprived him of life.
There was once a fine gentleman, all of whose moveables were a boot-jack and a hair-comb: but he had the finest false collars in the world; and it is about one of these collars that we are now to hear a story.
It was so old, that it began to think of marriage; and it happened that it came to be washed in company with a garter.
"Nay!
" said the collar.
"I never did see anything so slender and so fine, so soft and so neat.
May I not ask your name?
"
"That I shall not tell you!
" said the garter.
"Where do you live?
" asked the collar.
But the garter was so bashful, so modest, and thought it was a strange question to answer.
"You are certainly a girdle," said the collar; "that is to say an inside girdle.
I see well that you are both for use and ornament, my dear young lady.
"
"I will thank you not to speak to me," said the garter.
"I think I have not given the least occasion for it.
"
"Yes!
When one is as handsome as you," said the collar, "that is occasion enough.
"
"Don't come so near me, I beg of you!
" said the garter.
"You look so much like those men-folks.
"
"I am also a fine gentleman," said the collar.
"I have a bootjack and a hair-comb.
"
But that was not true, for it was his master who had them: but he boasted.
"Don't come so near me," said the garter: "I am not accustomed to it.
"
"Prude! "
exclaimed the collar; and then it was taken out of the washing-tub.
It was starched, hung over the back of a chair in the sunshine, and was then laid on the ironing-blanket; then came the warm box-iron. "
Dear lady! "
said the collar. "
Dear widow-lady!
I feel quite hot.
I am quite changed.
I begin to unfold myself.
You will burn a hole in me.
Oh!
I offer you my hand. "
"Rag!
" said the box-iron; and went proudly over the collar: for she fancied she was a steam-engine, that would go on the railroad and draw the waggons.
"Rag!
" said the box-iron.
The collar was a little jagged at the edge, and so came the long scissors to cut off the jagged part. "
Oh! "
said the collar. "
You are certainly the first opera dancer.
How well you can stretch your legs out!
It is the most graceful performance I have ever seen.
No one can imitate you. "
"I know it," said the scissors.
"You deserve to be a baroness," said the collar.
"All that I have is a fine gentleman, a boot-jack, and a hair-comb.
If I only had the barony!
"
"Do you seek my hand?
" said the scissors; for she was angry; and without more ado, she CUT HIM, and then he was condemned.
"I shall now be obliged to ask the hair-comb.
It is surprising how well you preserve your teeth, Miss," said the collar.
"Have you never thought of being betrothed?
"
"Yes, of course!
you may be sure of that," said the hair-comb.
"I AM betrothed - to the boot-jack!
"
"Betrothed!
" exclaimed the collar.
Now there was no other to court, and so he despised it.
A long time passed away, then the collar came into the rag chest at the paper mill; there was a large company of rags, the fine by themselves, and the coarse by themselves, just as it should be.
They all had much to say, but the collar the most; for he was a real boaster.
"I have had such an immense number of sweethearts! "
said the collar. "
I could not be in peace!
It is true, I was always a fine starched-up gentleman!
I had both a boot-jack and a hair-comb, which I never used!
You should have seen me then, you should have seen me when I lay down!
I shall never forget MY FIRST LOVE - she was a girdle, so fine, so soft, and so charming, she threw herself into a tub of water for my sake!
There was also a widow, who became glowing hot, but I left her standing till she got black again; there was also the first opera dancer, she gave me that cut which I now go with, she was so ferocious!
My own hair-comb was in love with me, she lost all her teeth from the heart-ache; yes, I have lived to see much of that sort of thing; but I am extremely sorry for the garter - I mean the girdle - that went into the water-tub.
I have much on my conscience, I want to become white paper! "
And it became so, all the rags were turned into white paper; but the collar came to be just this very piece of white paper we here see, and on which the story is printed; and that was because it boasted so terribly afterwards of what had never happened to it.
It would be well for us to beware, that we may not act in a similar manner, for we can never know if we may not, in the course of time, also come into the rag chest, and be made into white paper, and then have our whole life's history printed on it, even the most secret, and be obliged to run about and tell it ourselves, just like this collar.
Really, the largest green leaf in this country is a dock-leaf; if one holds it before one, it is like a whole apron, and if one holds it over one's head in rainy weather, it is almost as good as an umbrella, for it is so immensely large.
The burdock never grows alone, but where there grows one there always grow several: it is a great delight, and all this delightfulness is snails' food.
The great white snails which persons of quality in former times made fricassees of, ate, and said, "Hem, hem!
how delicious!
" for they thought it tasted so delicate - lived on dock-leaves, and therefore burdock seeds were sown.
Now, there was an old manor-house, where they no longer ate snails, they were quite extinct; but the burdocks were not extinct, they grew and grew all over the walks and all the beds; they could not get the mastery over them - it was a whole forest of burdocks.
Here and there stood an apple and a plum-tree, or else one never would have thought that it was a garden; all was burdocks, and there lived the two last venerable old snails.
They themselves knew not how old they were, but they could remember very well that there had been many more; that they were of a family from foreign lands, and that for them and theirs the whole forest was planted.
They had never been outside it, but they knew that there was still something more in the world, which was called the manor-house, and that there they were boiled, and then they became black, and were then placed on a silver dish; but what happened further they knew not; or, in fact, what it was to be boiled, and to lie on a silver dish, they could not possibly imagine; but it was said to be delightful, and particularly genteel.
Neither the chafers, the toads, nor the earth-worms, whom they asked about it could give them any information - none of them had been boiled or laid on a silver dish.
The old white snails were the first persons of distinction in the world, that they knew; the forest was planted for their sake, and the manor-house was there that they might be boiled and laid on a silver dish.
Now they lived a very lonely and happy life; and as they had no children themselves, they had adopted a little common snail, which they brought up as their own; but the little one would not grow, for he was of a common family; but the old ones, especially Dame Mother Snail, thought they could observe how he increased in size, and she begged father, if he could not see it, that he would at least feel the little snail's shell; and then he felt it, and found the good dame was right.
One day there was a heavy storm of rain.
"Hear how it beats like a drum on the dock-leaves!
" said Father Snail.
"There are also rain-drops!
" said Mother Snail.
"And now the rain pours right down the stalk!
You will see that it will be wet here!
I am very happy to think that we have our good house, and the little one has his also!
There is more done for us than for all other creatures, sure enough; but can you not see that we are folks of quality in the world?
We are provided with a house from our birth, and the burdock forest is planted for our sakes!
I should like to know how far it extends, and what there is outside!
"
"There is nothing at all," said Father Snail.
"No place can be better than ours, and I have nothing to wish for!
"
"Yes," said the dame.
"I would willingly go to the manorhouse, be boiled, and laid on a silver dish; all our forefathers have been treated so; there is something extraordinary in it, you may be sure!
"
"The manor-house has most likely fallen to ruin!
" said Father Snail.
"Or the burdocks have grown up over it, so that they cannot come out.
There need not, however, be any haste about that; but you are always in such a tremendous hurry, and the little one is beginning to be the same.
Has he not been creeping up that stalk these three days?
It gives me a headache when I look up to him!
"
"You must not scold him," said Mother Snail.
"He creeps so carefully; he will afford us much pleasure - and we have nothing but him to live for!
But have you not thought of it?
Where shall we get a wife for him?
Do you not think that there are some of our species at a great distance in the interior of the burdock forest?
"
"Black snails, I dare say, there are enough of," said the old one.
"Black snails without a house - but they are so common, and so conceited.
But we might give the ants a commission to look out for us; they run to and fro as if they had something to do, and they certainly know of a wife for our little snail!
"
"I know one, sure enough - the most charming one!
" said one of the ants.
"But I am afraid we shall hardly succeed, for she is a queen!
"
"That is nothing!
" said the old folks.
"Has she a house?
"
"She has a palace!
" said the ant.
"The finest ant's palace, with seven hundred passages!
"
"I thank you!
" said Mother Snail.
"Our son shall not go into an ant-hill; if you know nothing better than that, we shall give the commission to the white gnats.
They fly far and wide, in rain and sunshine; they know the whole forest here, both within and without.
"
"We have a wife for him," said the gnats.
"At a hundred human paces from here there sits a little snail in her house, on a gooseberry bush; she is quite lonely, and old enough to be married.
It is only a hundred human paces!
"
"Well, then, let her come to him!
" said the old ones.
"He has a whole forest of burdocks, she has only a bush!
"
And so they went and fetched little Miss Snail.
It was a whole week before she arrived; but therein was just the very best of it, for one could thus see that she was of the same species.
And then the marriage was celebrated.
Six earth-worms shone as well as they could.
In other respects the whole went off very quietly, for the old folks could not bear noise and merriment; but old Dame Snail made a brilliant speech.
Father Snail could not speak, he was too much affected; and so they gave them as a dowry and inheritance, the whole forest of burdocks, and said - what they had always said - that it was the best in the world; and if they lived honestly and decently, and increased and multiplied, they and their children would once in the course of time come to the manor-house, be boiled black, and laid on silver dishes.
After this speech was made, the old ones crept into their shells, and never more came out.
They slept; the young couple governed in the forest, and had a numerous progeny, but they were never boiled, and never came on the silver dishes; so from this they concluded that the manor-house had fallen to ruins, and that all the men in the world were extinct; and as no one contradicted them, so, of course it was so.
And the rain beat on the dock-leaves to make drum-music for their sake, and the sun shone in order to give the burdock forest a color for their sakes; and they were very happy, and the whole family was happy; for they, indeed were so.
Along time ago, there lived an old poet, a thoroughly kind old poet.
As he was sitting one evening in his room, a dreadful storm arose without, and the rain streamed down from heaven; but the old poet sat warm and comfortable in his chimney-corner, where the fire blazed and the roasting apple hissed.
"Those who have not a roof over their heads will be wetted to the skin," said the good old poet.
"Oh let me in!
Let me in!
I am cold, and I'm so wet!
" exclaimed suddenly a child that stood crying at the door and knocking for admittance, while the rain poured down, and the wind made all the windows rattle.
"Poor thing!
" said the old poet, as he went to open the door.
There stood a little boy, quite naked, and the water ran down from his long golden hair; he trembled with cold, and had he not come into a warm room he would most certainly have perished in the frightful tempest.
"Poor child!
" said the old poet, as he took the boy by the hand.
"Come in, come in, and I will soon restore thee!
Thou shalt have wine and roasted apples, for thou art verily a charming child!
" And the boy was so really.
His eyes were like two bright stars; and although the water trickled down his hair, it waved in beautiful curls.
He looked exactly like a little angel, but he was so pale, and his whole body trembled with cold.
He had a nice little bow in his hand, but it was quite spoiled by the rain, and the tints of his many-colored arrows ran one into the other.
The old poet seated himself beside his hearth, and took the little fellow on his lap; he squeezed the water out of his dripping hair, warmed his hands between his own, and boiled for him some sweet wine.
Then the boy recovered, his cheeks again grew rosy, he jumped down from the lap where he was sitting, and danced round the kind old poet.
"You are a merry fellow," said the old man.
"What's your name?
"
"My name is Cupid," answered the boy.
"Don't you know me?
There lies my bow; it shoots well, I can assure you!
Look, the weather is now clearing up, and the moon is shining clear again through the window.
"
"Why, your bow is quite spoiled," said the old poet.
"That were sad indeed," said the boy, and he took the bow in his hand and examined it on every side.
"Oh, it is dry again, and is not hurt at all; the string is quite tight.
I will try it directly.
" And he bent his bow, took aim, and shot an arrow at the old poet, right into his heart.
"You see now that my bow was not spoiled," said he laughing; and away he ran.
The naughty boy, to shoot the old poet in that way; he who had taken him into his warm room, who had treated him so kindly, and who had given him warm wine and the very best apples!
The poor poet lay on the earth and wept, for the arrow had really flown into his heart.
"Fie!
" said he.
"How naughty a boy Cupid is!
I will tell all children about him, that they may take care and not play with him, for he will only cause them sorrow and many a heartache.
"
And all good children to whom he related this story, took great heed of this naughty Cupid; but he made fools of them still, for he is astonishingly cunning.
When the university students come from the lectures, he runs beside them in a black coat, and with a book under his arm.
It is quite impossible for them to know him, and they walk along with him arm in arm, as if he, too, were a student like themselves; and then, unperceived, he thrusts an arrow to their bosom.
When the young maidens come from being examined by the clergyman, or go to church to be confirmed, there he is again close behind them.
Yes, he is forever following people.
At the play, he sits in the great chandelier and burns in bright flames, so that people think it is really a flame, but they soon discover it is something else.
He roves about in the garden of the palace and upon the ramparts: yes, once he even shot your father and mother right in the heart.
Ask them only and you will hear what they'll tell you.
Oh, he is a naughty boy, that Cupid; you must never have anything to do with him.
He is forever running after everybody.
Only think, he shot an arrow once at your old grandmother!
But that is a long time ago, and it is all past now; however, a thing of that sort she never forgets.
Fie, naughty Cupid!
But now you know him, and you know, too, how ill-behaved he is!
Ah!
yes, that was little Tuk: in reality his name was not Tuk, but that was what he called himself before he could speak plain: he meant it for Charles, and it is all well enough if one does but know it.
He had now to take care of his little sister Augusta, who was much younger than himself, and he was, besides, to learn his lesson at the same time; but these two things would not do together at all.
There sat the poor little fellow, with his sister on his lap, and he sang to her all the songs he knew; and he glanced the while from time to time into the geography-book that lay open before him.
By the next morning he was to have learnt all the towns in Zealand by heart, and to know about them all that is possible to be known.
His mother now came home, for she had been out, and took little Augusta on her arm.
Tuk ran quickly to the window, and read so eagerly that he pretty nearly read his eyes out; for it got darker and darker, but his mother had no money to buy a candle.
"There goes the old washerwoman over the way," said his mother, as she looked out of the window.
"The poor woman can hardly drag herself along, and she must now drag the pail home from the fountain.
Be a good boy, Tukey, and run across and help the old woman, won't you?
"
So Tuk ran over quickly and helped her; but when he came back again into the room it was quite dark, and as to a light, there was no thought of such a thing.
He was now to go to bed; that was an old turn-up bedstead; in it he lay and thought about his geography lesson, and of Zealand, and of all that his master had told him.
He ought, to be sure, to have read over his lesson again, but that, you know, he could not do.
He therefore put his geography-book under his pillow, because he had heard that was a very good thing to do when one wants to learn one's lesson; but one cannot, however, rely upon it entirely.
Well, there he lay, and thought and thought, and all at once it was just as if someone kissed his eyes and mouth: he slept, and yet he did not sleep; it was as though the old washerwoman gazed on him with her mild eyes and said, "It were a great sin if you were not to know your lesson tomorrow morning.
You have aided me, I therefore will now help you; and the loving God will do so at all times.
" And all of a sudden the book under Tuk's pillow began scraping and scratching.
"Kickery-ki!
kluk!
kluk!
kluk!
" - that was an old hen who came creeping along, and she was from Kjoge.
"I am a Kjoger hen," said she, and then she related how many inhabitants there were there, and about the battle that had taken place, and which, after all, was hardly worth talking about.
"Kribledy, krabledy - plump!
" down fell somebody: it was a wooden bird, the popinjay used at the shooting-matches at Prastoe.
Now he said that there were just as many inhabitants as he had nails in his body; and he was very proud.
"Thorwaldsen lived almost next door to me.
* Plump!
Here I lie capitally.
"
* Prastoe, a still smaller town than Kjoge.
Some hundred paces from it lies the manor-house Ny Soe, where Thorwaldsen, the famed sculptor, generally sojourned during his stay in Denmark, and where he called many of his immortal works into existence.
But little Tuk was no longer lying down: all at once he was on horseback.
On he went at full gallop, still galloping on and on.
A knight with a gleaming plume, and most magnificently dressed, held him before him on the horse, and thus they rode through the wood to the old town of Bordingborg, and that was a large and very lively town.
High towers rose from the castle of the king, and the brightness of many candles streamed from all the windows; within was dance and song, and King Waldemar and the young, richly-attired maids of honor danced together.
The morn now came; and as soon as the sun appeared, the whole town and the king's palace crumbled together, and one tower after the other; and at last only a single one remained standing where the castle had been before,* and the town was so small and poor, and the school boys came along with their books under their arms, and said, "2000 inhabitants!
" but that was not true, for there were not so many.
*Bordingborg, in the reign of King Waldemar, a considerable place, now an unimportant little town.
One solitary tower only, and some remains of a wall, show where the castle once stood.
And little Tukey lay in his bed: it seemed to him as if he dreamed, and yet as if he were not dreaming; however, somebody was close beside him.
"Little Tukey!
Little Tukey!
" cried someone near.
It was a seaman, quite a little personage, so little as if he were a midshipman; but a midshipman it was not.
"Many remembrances from Corsor.
* That is a town that is just rising into importance; a lively town that has steam-boats and stagecoaches: formerly people called it ugly, but that is no longer true.
I lie on the sea," said Corsor; "I have high roads and gardens, and I have given birth to a poet who was witty and amusing, which all poets are not.
I once intended to equip a ship that was to sail all round the earth; but I did not do it, although I could have done so: and then, too, I smell so deliciously, for close before the gate bloom the most beautiful roses.
"
*Corsor, on the Great Belt, called, formerly, before the introduction of steam-vessels, when travellers were often obliged to wait a long time for a favorable wind, "the most tiresome of towns.
" The poet Baggesen was born here.
Little Tuk looked, and all was red and green before his eyes; but as soon as the confusion of colors was somewhat over, all of a sudden there appeared a wooded slope close to the bay, and high up above stood a magnificent old church, with two high pointed towers.
From out the hill-side spouted fountains in thick streams of water, so that there was a continual splashing; and close beside them sat an old king with a golden crown upon his white head: that was King Hroar, near the fountains, close to the town of Roeskilde, as it is now called.
And up the slope into the old church went all the kings and queens of Denmark, hand in hand, all with their golden crowns; and the organ played and the fountains rustled.
Little Tuk saw all, heard all.
"Do not forget the diet," said King Hroar.
*
*Roeskilde, once the capital of Denmark.
The town takes its name from King Hroar, and the many fountains in the neighborhood.
In the beautiful cathedral the greater number of the kings and queens of Denmark are interred.
In Roeskilde, too, the members of the Danish Diet assemble.
Again all suddenly disappeared.
Yes, and whither?
It seemed to him just as if one turned over a leaf in a book.
And now stood there an old peasant-woman, who came from Soroe,* where grass grows in the market-place.
She had an old grey linen apron hanging over her head and back: it was so wet, it certainly must have been raining.
"Yes, that it has," said she; and she now related many pretty things out of Holberg's comedies, and about Waldemar and Absalon; but all at once she cowered together, and her head began shaking backwards and forwards, and she looked as she were going to make a spring.
"Croak!
croak!
" said she.
"It is wet, it is wet; there is such a pleasant deathlike stillness in Sorbe!
" She was now suddenly a frog, "Croak"; and now she was an old woman.
"One must dress according to the weather," said she.
"It is wet; it is wet.
My town is just like a bottle; and one gets in by the neck, and by the neck one must get out again!
In former times I had the finest fish, and now I have fresh rosy-cheeked boys at the bottom of the bottle, who learn wisdom, Hebrew, Greek - Croak!
"
* Sorbe, a very quiet little town, beautifully situated, surrounded by woods and lakes.
Holberg, Denmark's Moliere, founded here an academy for the sons of the nobles.
The poets Hauch and Ingemann were appointed professors here.
The latter lives there still.
When she spoke it sounded just like the noise of frogs, or as if one walked with great boots over a moor; always the same tone, so uniform and so tiring that little Tuk fell into a good sound sleep, which, by the bye, could not do him any harm.
But even in this sleep there came a dream, or whatever else it was: his little sister Augusta, she with the blue eyes and the fair curling hair, was suddenly a tall, beautiful girl, and without having wings was yet able to fly; and she now flew over Zealand - over the green woods and the blue lakes.
"Do you hear the cock crow, Tukey?
Cock-a-doodle-doo!
The cocks are flying up from Kjoge!
You will have a farm-yard, so large, oh!
so very large!
You will suffer neither hunger nor thirst!
You will get on in the world!
You will be a rich and happy man!
Your house will exalt itself like King Waldemar's tower, and will be richly decorated with marble statues, like that at Prastoe.
You understand what I mean.
Your name shall circulate with renown all round the earth, like unto the ship that was to have sailed from Corsor; and in Roeskilde - "
"Do not forget the diet!
" said King Hroar.
"Then you will speak well and wisely, little Tukey; and when at last you sink into your grave, you shall sleep as quietly - "
"As if I lay in Soroe," said Tuk, awaking.
It was bright day, and he was now quite unable to call to mind his dream; that, however, was not at all necessary, for one may not know what the future will bring.
And out of bed he jumped, and read in his book, and now all at once he knew his whole lesson.
And the old washerwoman popped her head in at the door, nodded to him friendly, and said, "Thanks, many thanks, my good child, for your help!
May the good ever-loving God fulfil your loveliest dream!
"
Little Tukey did not at all know what he had dreamed, but the loving God knew it.
There was once a king's son who had a larger and more beautiful collection of books than any one else in the world, and full of splendid copper-plate engravings.
He could read and obtain information respecting every people of every land; but not a word could he find to explain the situation of the garden of paradise, and this was just what he most wished to know.
His grandmother had told him when he was quite a little boy, just old enough to go to school, that each flower in the garden of paradise was a sweet cake, that the pistils were full of rich wine, that on one flower history was written, on another geography or tables; so those who wished to learn their lessons had only to eat some of the cakes, and the more they ate, the more history, geography, or tables they knew.
He believed it all then; but as he grew older, and learnt more and more, he became wise enough to understand that the splendor of the garden of paradise must be very different to all this.
"Oh, why did Eve pluck the fruit from the tree of knowledge?
why did Adam eat the forbidden fruit?
" thought the king's son: "if I had been there it would never have happened, and there would have been no sin in the world.
" The garden of paradise occupied all his thoughts till he reached his seventeenth year.
One day he was walking alone in the wood, which was his greatest pleasure, when evening came on.
The clouds gathered, and the rain poured down as if the sky had been a waterspout; and it was as dark as the bottom of a well at midnight; sometimes he slipped over the smooth grass, or fell over stones that projected out of the rocky ground.
Every thing was dripping with moisture, and the poor prince had not a dry thread about him.
He was obliged at last to climb over great blocks of stone, with water spurting from the thick moss.
He began to feel quite faint, when he heard a most singular rushing noise, and saw before him a large cave, from which came a blaze of light.
In the middle of the cave an immense fire was burning, and a noble stag, with its branching horns, was placed on a spit between the trunks of two pine-trees.
It was turning slowly before the fire, and an elderly woman, as large and strong as if she had been a man in disguise, sat by, throwing one piece of wood after another into the flames.
"Come in," she said to the prince; "sit down by the fire and dry yourself.
"
"There is a great draught here," said the prince, as he seated himself on the ground.
"It will be worse when my sons come home," replied the woman; "you are now in the cavern of the Winds, and my sons are the four Winds of heaven: can you understand that?
"
"Where are your sons?
" asked the prince.
"It is difficult to answer stupid questions," said the woman.
"My sons have plenty of business on hand; they are playing at shuttlecock with the clouds up yonder in the king's hall," and she pointed upwards.
"Oh, indeed," said the prince; "but you speak more roughly and harshly and are not so gentle as the women I am used to.
"
"Yes, that is because they have nothing else to do; but I am obliged to be harsh, to keep my boys in order, and I can do it, although they are so head-strong.
Do you see those four sacks hanging on the wall?
Well, they are just as much afraid of those sacks, as you used to be of the rat behind the looking-glass.
I can bend the boys together, and put them in the sacks without any resistance on their parts, I can tell you.
There they stay, and dare not attempt to come out until I allow them to do so.
And here comes one of them.
"
It was the North Wind who came in, bringing with him a cold, piercing blast; large hailstones rattled on the floor, and snowflakes were scattered around in all directions.
He wore a bearskin dress and cloak.
His sealskin cap was drawn over his ears, long icicles hung from his beard, and one hailstone after another rolled from the collar of his jacket.
"Don't go too near the fire," said the prince, "or your hands and face will be frost-bitten.
"
"Frost-bitten!
" said the North Wind, with a loud laugh; "why frost is my greatest delight.
What sort of a little snip are you, and how did you find your way to the cavern of the Winds?
"
"He is my guest," said the old woman, "and if you are not satisfied with that explanation you can go into the sack.
Do you understand me?
"
That settled the matter.
So the North Wind began to relate his adventures, whence he came, and where he had been for a whole month.
"I come from the polar seas," he said; "I have been on the Bear's Island with the Russian walrus-hunters.
I sat and slept at the helm of their ship, as they sailed away from North Cape.
Sometimes when I woke, the storm-birds would fly about my legs.
They are curious birds; they give one flap with their wings, and then on their outstretched pinions soar far away.
"Don't make such a long story of it," said the mother of the winds; "what sort of a place is Bear's Island?
"
"A very beautiful place, with a floor for dancing as smooth and flat as a plate.
Half-melted snow, partly covered with moss, sharp stones, and skeletons of walruses and polar-bears, lie all about, their gigantic limbs in a state of green decay.
It would seem as if the sun never shone there.
I blew gently, to clear away the mist, and then I saw a little hut, which had been built from the wood of a wreck, and was covered with the skins of the walrus, the fleshy side outwards; it looked green and red, and on the roof sat a growling bear.
Then I went to the sea shore, to look after birds' nests, and saw the unfledged nestlings opening their mouths and screaming for food.
I blew into the thousand little throats, and quickly stopped their screaming.
Farther on were the walruses with pig's heads, and teeth a yard long, rolling about like great worms.
"You relate your adventures very well, my son," said the mother, "it makes my mouth water to hear you.
"After that," continued the North Wind, "the hunting commenced.
The harpoon was flung into the breast of the walrus, so that a smoking stream of blood spurted forth like a fountain, and besprinkled the ice.
Then I thought of my own game; I began to blow, and set my own ships, the great icebergs sailing, so that they might crush the boats.
Oh, how the sailors howled and cried out!
but I howled louder than they.
They were obliged to unload their cargo, and throw their chests and the dead walruses on the ice.
Then I sprinkled snow over them, and left them in their crushed boats to drift southward, and to taste salt water.
They will never return to Bear's Island.
"
"So you have done mischief," said the mother of the Winds.
"I shall leave others to tell the good I have done," he replied.
"But here comes my brother from the West; I like him best of all, for he has the smell of the sea about him, and brings in a cold, fresh air as he enters.
"
"Is that the little Zephyr?
" asked the prince.
"Yes, it is the little Zephyr," said the old woman; "but he is not little now.
In years gone by he was a beautiful boy; now that is all past.
"
He came in, looking like a wild man, and he wore a slouched hat to protect his head from injury.
In his hand he carried a club, cut from a mahogany tree in the American forests, not a trifle to carry.
"Whence do you come?
" asked the mother.
"I come from the wilds of the forests, where the thorny brambles form thick hedges between the trees; where the water-snake lies in the wet grass, and mankind seem to be unknown.
"
"What were you doing there?
"
"I looked into the deep river, and saw it rushing down from the rocks.
The water drops mounted to the clouds and glittered in the rainbow.
I saw the wild buffalo swimming in the river, but the strong tide carried him away amidst a flock of wild ducks, which flew into the air as the waters dashed onwards, leaving the buffalo to be hurled over the waterfall.
This pleased me; so I raised a storm, which rooted up old trees, and sent them floating down the river.
"
"And what else have you done?
" asked the old woman.
"I have rushed wildly across the savannahs; I have stroked the wild horses, and shaken the cocoa-nuts from the trees.
Yes, I have many stories to relate; but I need not tell everything I know.
You know it all very well, don't you, old lady?
" And he kissed his mother so roughly, that she nearly fell backwards.
Oh, he was, indeed, a wild fellow.
Now in came the South Wind, with a turban and a flowing Bedouin cloak.
"How cold it is here!
" said he, throwing more wood on the fire.
"It is easy to feel that the North Wind has arrived here before me.
"
"Why it is hot enough here to roast a bear," said the North Wind.
"You are a bear yourself," said the other.
"Do you want to be put in the sack, both of you?
" said the old woman.
"Sit down, now, on that stone, yonder, and tell me where you have been.
"
"In Africa, mother.
I went out with the Hottentots, who were lion-hunting in the Kaffir land, where the plains are covered with grass the color of a green olive; and here I ran races with the ostrich, but I soon outstripped him in swiftness.
At last I came to the desert, in which lie the golden sands, looking like the bottom of the sea.
Here I met a caravan, and the travellers had just killed their last camel, to obtain water; there was very little for them, and they continued their painful journey beneath the burning sun, and over the hot sands, which stretched before them a vast, boundless desert.
Then I rolled myself in the loose sand, and whirled it in burning columns over their heads.
The dromedarys stood still in terror, while the merchants drew their caftans over their heads, and threw themselves on the ground before me, as they do before Allah, their god.
Then I buried them beneath a pyramid of sand, which covers them all.
When I blow that away on my next visit, the sun will bleach their bones, and travellers will see that others have been there before them; otherwise, in such a wild desert, they might not believe it possible.
"
"So you have done nothing but evil," said the mother.
"Into the sack with you;" and, before he was aware, she had seized the South Wind round the body, and popped him into the bag.
He rolled about on the floor, till she sat herself upon him to keep him still.
"These boys of yours are very lively," said the prince.
"Yes," she replied, "but I know how to correct them, when necessary; and here comes the fourth.
" In came the East Wind, dressed like a Chinese.
"Oh, you come from that quarter, do you?
" said she; "I thought you had been to the garden of paradise.
"
"I am going there to-morrow," he replied; "I have not been there for a hundred years.
I have just come from China, where I danced round the porcelain tower till all the bells jingled again.
In the streets an official flogging was taking place, and bamboo canes were being broken on the shoulders of men of every high position, from the first to the ninth grade.
They cried, 'Many thanks, my fatherly benefactor;' but I am sure the words did not come from their hearts, so I rang the bells till they sounded, 'ding, ding-dong.
'"
"You are a wild boy," said the old woman; "it is well for you that you are going to-morrow to the garden of paradise; you always get improved in your education there.
Drink deeply from the fountain of wisdom while you are there, and bring home a bottleful for me.
"
"That I will," said the East Wind; "but why have you put my brother South in a bag?
Let him out; for I want him to tell me about the phoenix-bird.
The princess always wants to hear of this bird when I pay her my visit every hundred years.
If you will open the sack, sweetest mother, I will give you two pocketfuls of tea, green and fresh as when I gathered it from the spot where it grew.
"
"Well, for the sake of the tea, and because you are my own boy, I will open the bag.
"
She did so, and the South Wind crept out, looking quite cast down, because the prince had seen his disgrace.
"There is a palm-leaf for the princess," he said.
"The old phoenix, the only one in the world, gave it to me himself.
He has scratched on it with his beak the whole of his history during the hundred years he has lived.
She can there read how the old phoenix set fire to his own nest, and sat upon it while it was burning, like a Hindoo widow.
The dry twigs around the nest crackled and smoked till the flames burst forth and consumed the phoenix to ashes.
Amidst the fire lay an egg, red hot, which presently burst with a loud report, and out flew a young bird.
He is the only phoenix in the world, and the king over all the other birds.
He has bitten a hole in the leaf which I give you, and that is his greeting to the princess.
"
"Now let us have something to eat," said the mother of the Winds.
So they all sat down to feast on the roasted stag; and as the prince sat by the side of the East Wind, they soon became good friends.
"Pray tell me," said the prince, "who is that princess of whom you have been talking!
and where lies the garden of paradise?
"
"Ho!
ho!
" said the East Wind, "would you like to go there?
Well, you can fly off with me to-morrow; but I must tell you one thing - no human being has been there since the time of Adam and Eve.
I suppose you have read of them in your Bible.
"
"Of course I have," said the prince.
"Well," continued the East Wind, "when they were driven out of the garden of paradise, it sunk into the earth; but it retained its warm sunshine, its balmy air, and all its splendor.
The fairy queen lives there, in the island of happiness, where death never comes, and all is beautiful.
I can manage to take you there to-morrow, if you will sit on my back.
But now don't talk any more, for I want to go to sleep;" and then they all slept.
When the prince awoke in the early morning, he was not a little surprised at finding himself high up above the clouds.
He was seated on the back of the East Wind, who held him faithfully; and they were so high in the air that woods and fields, rivers and lakes, as they lay beneath them, looked like a painted map.
"Good morning," said the East Wind.
"You might have slept on a while; for there is very little to see in the flat country over which we are passing unless you like to count the churches; they look like spots of chalk on a green board.
" The green board was the name he gave to the green fields and meadows.
"It was very rude of me not to say good-bye to your mother and your brothers," said the prince.
"They will excuse you, as you were asleep," said the East Wind; and then they flew on faster than ever.
The leaves and branches of the trees rustled as they passed.
When they flew over seas and lakes, the waves rose higher, and the large ships dipped into the water like diving swans.
As darkness came on, towards evening, the great towns looked charming; lights were sparkling, now seen now hidden, just as the sparks go out one after another on a piece of burnt paper.
The prince clapped his hands with pleasure; but the East Wind advised him not to express his admiration in that manner, or he might fall down, and find himself hanging on a church steeple.
The eagle in the dark forests flies swiftly; but faster than he flew the East Wind.
The Cossack, on his small horse, rides lightly o'er the plains; but lighter still passed the prince on the winds of the wind.
"There are the Himalayas, the highest mountains in Asia," said the East Wind.
"We shall soon reach the garden of paradise now.
"
Then, they turned southward, and the air became fragrant with the perfume of spices and flowers.
Here figs and pomegranates grew wild, and the vines were covered with clusters of blue and purple grapes.
Here they both descended to the earth, and stretched themselves on the soft grass, while the flowers bowed to the breath of the wind as if to welcome it.
"Are we now in the garden of paradise?
" asked the prince.
"No, indeed," replied the East Wind; "but we shall be there very soon.
Do you see that wall of rocks, and the cavern beneath it, over which the grape vines hang like a green curtain?
Through that cavern we must pass.
Wrap your cloak round you; for while the sun scorches you here, a few steps farther it will be icy cold.
The bird flying past the entrance to the cavern feels as if one wing were in the region of summer, and the other in the depths of winter.
"
"So this then is the way to the garden of paradise?
" asked the prince, as they entered the cavern.
It was indeed cold; but the cold soon passed, for the East Wind spread his wings, and they gleamed like the brightest fire.
As they passed on through this wonderful cave, the prince could see great blocks of stone, from which water trickled, hanging over their heads in fantastic shapes.
Sometimes it was so narrow that they had to creep on their hands and knees, while at other times it was lofty and wide, like the free air.
It had the appearance of a chapel for the dead, with petrified organs and silent pipes.
"We seem to be passing through the valley of death to the garden of paradise," said the prince.
But the East Wind answered not a word, only pointed forwards to a lovely blue light which gleamed in the distance.
The blocks of stone assumed a misty appearance, till at last they looked like white clouds in moonlight.
The air was fresh and balmy, like a breeze from the mountains perfumed with flowers from a valley of roses.
A river, clear as the air itself, sparkled at their feet, while in its clear depths could be seen gold and silver fish sporting in the bright water, and purple eels emitting sparks of fire at every moment, while the broad leaves of the water-lilies, that floated on its surface, flickered with all the colors of the rainbow.
The flower in its color of flame seemed to receive its nourishment from the water, as a lamp is sustained by oil.
A marble bridge, of such exquisite workmanship that it appeared as if formed of lace and pearls, led to the island of happiness, in which bloomed the garden of paradise.
The East Wind took the prince in his arms, and carried him over, while the flowers and the leaves sang the sweet songs of his childhood in tones so full and soft that no human voice could venture to imitate.
Within the garden grew large trees, full of sap; but whether they were palm-trees or gigantic water-plants, the prince knew not.
The climbing plants hung in garlands of green and gold, like the illuminations on the margins of old missals or twined among the initial letters.
Birds, flowers, and festoons appeared intermingled in seeming confusion.
Close by, on the grass, stood a group of peacocks, with radiant tails outspread to the sun.
The prince touched them, and found, to his surprise, that they were not really birds, but the leaves of the burdock tree, which shone with the colors of a peacock's tail.
The lion and the tiger, gentle and tame, were springing about like playful cats among the green bushes, whose perfume was like the fragrant blossom of the olive.
The plumage of the wood-pigeon glistened like pearls as it struck the lion's mane with its wings; while the antelope, usually so shy, stood near, nodding its head as if it wished to join in the frolic.
The fairy of paradise next made her appearance.
Her raiment shone like the sun, and her serene countenance beamed with happiness like that of a mother rejoicing over her child.
She was young and beautiful, and a train of lovely maidens followed her, each wearing a bright star in her hair.
The East Wind gave her the palm-leaf, on which was written the history of the phoenix; and her eyes sparkled with joy.
She then took the prince by the hand, and led him into her palace, the walls of which were richly colored, like a tulip-leaf when it is turned to the sun.
The roof had the appearance of an inverted flower, and the colors grew deeper and brighter to the gazer.
The prince walked to a window, and saw what appeared to be the tree of knowledge of good and evil, with Adam and Eve standing by, and the serpent near them.
"I thought they were banished from paradise," he said.
The princess smiled, and told him that time had engraved each event on a window-pane in the form of a picture; but, unlike other pictures, all that it represented lived and moved, - the leaves rustled, and the persons went and came, as in a looking-glass.
He looked through another pane, and saw the ladder in Jacob's dream, on which the angels were ascending and descending with outspread wings.
All that had ever happened in the world here lived and moved on the panes of glass, in pictures such as time alone could produce.
The fairy now led the prince into a large, lofty room with transparent walls, through which the light shone.
Here were portraits, each one appearing more beautiful than the other - millions of happy beings, whose laughter and song mingled in one sweet melody: some of these were in such an elevated position that they appeared smaller than the smallest rosebud, or like pencil dots on paper.
In the centre of the hall stood a tree, with drooping branches, from which hung golden apples, both great and small, looking like oranges amid the green leaves.
It was the tree of knowledge of good and evil, from which Adam and Eve had plucked and eaten the forbidden fruit, and from each leaf trickled a bright red dewdrop, as if the tree were weeping tears of blood for their sin.
"Let us now take the boat," said the fairy: "a sail on the cool waters will refresh us.
But we shall not move from the spot, although the boat may rock on the swelling water; the countries of the world will glide before us, but we shall remain still.
"
It was indeed wonderful to behold.
First came the lofty Alps, snow-clad, and covered with clouds and dark pines.
The horn resounded, and the shepherds sang merrily in the valleys.
The banana-trees bent their drooping branches over the boat, black swans floated on the water, and singular animals and flowers appeared on the distant shore.
New Holland, the fifth division of the world, now glided by, with mountains in the background, looking blue in the distance.
They heard the song of the priests, and saw the wild dance of the savage to the sound of the drums and trumpets of bone; the pyramids of Egypt rising to the clouds; columns and sphinxes, overthrown and buried in the sand, followed in their turn; while the northern lights flashed out over the extinguished volcanoes of the north, in fireworks none could imitate.
The prince was delighted, and yet he saw hundreds of other wonderful things more than can be described.
"Can I stay here forever?
" asked he.
"That depends upon yourself," replied the fairy.
"If you do not, like Adam, long for what is forbidden, you can remain here always.
"
"I should not touch the fruit on the tree of knowledge," said the prince; "there is abundance of fruit equally beautiful.
"
"Examine your own heart," said the princess, "and if you do not feel sure of its strength, return with the East Wind who brought you.
He is about to fly back, and will not return here for a hundred years.
The time will not seem to you more than a hundred hours, yet even that is a long time for temptation and resistance.
Every evening, when I leave you, I shall be obliged to say, 'Come with me,' and to beckon to you with my hand.
But you must not listen, nor move from your place to follow me; for with every step you will find your power to resist weaker.
If once you attempted to follow me, you would soon find yourself in the hall, where grows the tree of knowledge, for I sleep beneath its perfumed branches.
If you stooped over me, I should be forced to smile.
If you then kissed my lips, the garden of paradise would sink into the earth, and to you it would be lost.
A keen wind from the desert would howl around you; cold rain fall on your head, and sorrow and woe be your future lot.
"
"I will remain," said the prince.
So the East Wind kissed him on the forehead, and said, "Be firm; then shall we meet again when a hundred years have passed.
Farewell, farewell.
" Then the East Wind spread his broad pinions, which shone like the lightning in harvest, or as the northern lights in a cold winter.
"Farewell, farewell," echoed the trees and the flowers.
Storks and pelicans flew after him in feathery bands, to accompany him to the boundaries of the garden.
"Now we will commence dancing," said the fairy; "and when it is nearly over at sunset, while I am dancing with you, I shall make a sign, and ask you to follow me: but do not obey.
I shall be obliged to repeat the same thing for a hundred years; and each time, when the trial is past, if you resist, you will gain strength, till resistance becomes easy, and at last the temptation will be quite overcome.
This evening, as it will be the first time, I have warned you.
"
After this the fairy led him into a large hall, filled with transparent lilies.
The yellow stamina of each flower formed a tiny golden harp, from which came forth strains of music like the mingled tones of flute and lyre.
Beautiful maidens, slender and graceful in form, and robed in transparent gauze, floated through the dance, and sang of the happy life in the garden of paradise, where death never entered, and where all would bloom forever in immortal youth.
As the sun went down, the whole heavens became crimson and gold, and tinted the lilies with the hue of roses.
Then the beautiful maidens offered to the prince sparkling wine; and when he had drank, he felt happiness greater than he had ever known before.
Presently the background of the hall opened and the tree of knowledge appeared, surrounded by a halo of glory that almost blinded him.
Voices, soft and lovely as his mother's sounded in his ears, as if she were singing to him, "My child, my beloved child.
" Then the fairy beckoned to him, and said in sweet accents, "Come with me, come with me.
" Forgetting his promise, forgetting it even on the very first evening, he rushed towards her, while she continued to beckon to him and to smile.
The fragrance around him overpowered his senses, the music from the harps sounded more entrancing, while around the tree appeared millions of smiling faces, nodding and singing.
"Man should know everything; man is the lord of the earth.
" The tree of knowledge no longer wept tears of blood, for the dewdrops shone like glittering stars.
"Come, come," continued that thrilling voice, and the prince followed the call.
At every step his cheeks glowed, and the blood rushed wildly through his veins.
"I must follow," he cried; "it is not a sin, it cannot be, to follow beauty and joy.
I only want to see her sleep, and nothing will happen unless I kiss her, and that I will not do, for I have strength to resist, and a determined will.
"
The fairy threw off her dazzling attire, bent back the boughs, and in another moment was hidden among them.
"I have not sinned yet," said the prince, "and I will not;" and then he pushed aside the boughs to follow the princess.
She was lying already asleep, beautiful as only a fairy in the garden of paradise could be.
She smiled as he bent over her, and he saw tears trembling out of her beautiful eyelashes.
"Do you weep for me?
" he whispered.
"Oh weep not, thou loveliest of women.
Now do I begin to understand the happiness of paradise; I feel it to my inmost soul, in every thought.
A new life is born within me.
One moment of such happiness is worth an eternity of darkness and woe.
" He stooped and kissed the tears from her eyes, and touched her lips with his.
A clap of thunder, loud and awful, resounded through the trembling air.
All around him fell into ruin.
The lovely fairy, the beautiful garden, sunk deeper and deeper.
The prince saw it sinking down in the dark night till it shone only like a star in the distance beneath him.
Then he felt a coldness, like death, creeping over him; his eyes closed, and he became insensible.
When he recovered, a chilling rain was beating upon him, and a sharp wind blew on his head.
"Alas!
what have I done?
" he sighed; "I have sinned like Adam, and the garden of paradise has sunk into the earth.
" He opened his eyes, and saw the star in the distance, but it was the morning star in heaven which glittered in the darkness.
Presently he stood up and found himself in the depths of the forest, close to the cavern of the Winds, and the mother of the Winds sat by his side.
She looked angry, and raised her arm in the air as she spoke.
"The very first evening!
" she said.
"Well, I expected it!
If you were my son, you should go into the sack.
"
"And there he will have to go at last," said a strong old man, with large black wings, and a scythe in his hand, whose name was Death.
"He shall be laid in his coffin, but not yet.
I will allow him to wander about the world for a while, to atone for his sin, and to give him time to become better.
But I shall return when he least expects me.
I shall lay him in a black coffin, place it on my head, and fly away with it beyond the stars.
There also blooms a garden of paradise, and if he is good and pious he will be admitted; but if his thoughts are bad, and his heart is full of sin, he will sink with his coffin deeper than the garden of paradise has sunk.
Once in every thousand years I shall go and fetch him, when he will either be condemned to sink still deeper, or be raised to a happier life in the world beyond the stars.
"
"Near the shores of the great Belt, which is one of the straits that connect the Cattegat with the Baltic, stands an old mansion with thick red walls.
I know every stone of it," says the Wind.
"I saw it when it was part of the castle of Marck Stig on the promontory.
But the castle was obliged to be pulled down, and the stone was used again for the walls of a new mansion on another spot - the baronial residence of Borreby, which still stands near the coast.
I knew them well, those noble lords and ladies, the successive generations that dwelt there; and now I'm going to tell you of Waldemar Daa and his daughters.
How proud was his bearing, for he was of royal blood, and could boast of more noble deeds than merely hunting the stag and emptying the wine-cup.
His rule was despotic: 'It shall be,' he was accustomed to say.
His wife, in garments embroidered with gold, stepped proudly over the polished marble floors.
The tapestries were gorgeous, and the furniture of costly and artistic taste.
She had brought gold and plate with her into the house.
The cellars were full of wine.
Black, fiery horses, neighed in the stables.
There was a look of wealth about the house of Borreby at that time.
They had three children, daughters, fair and delicate maidens - Ida, Joanna, and Anna Dorothea; I have never forgotten their names.
They were a rich, noble family, born in affluence and nurtured in luxury.
"Whir-r-r, whir-r-r!
" roared the Wind, and went on, "I did not see in this house, as in other great houses, the high-born lady sitting among her women, turning the spinning-wheel.
She could sweep the sounding chords of the guitar, and sing to the music, not always Danish melodies, but the songs of a strange land.
It was 'Live and let live,' here.
Stranger guests came from far and near, music sounded, goblets clashed, and I," said the Wind, "was not able to drown the noise.
Ostentation, pride, splendor, and display ruled, but not the fear of the Lord.
"It was on the evening of the first day of May," the Wind continued, "I came from the west, and had seen the ships overpowered with the waves, when all on board persisted or were cast shipwrecked on the coast of Jutland.
I had hurried across the heath and over Jutland's wood-girt eastern coast, and over the island of Funen, and then I drove across the great belt, sighing and moaning.
At length I lay down to rest on the shores of Zeeland, near to the great house of Borreby, where the splendid forest of oaks still flourished.
The young men of the neighborhood were collecting branches and brushwood under the oak-trees.
The largest and dryest they could find they carried into the village, and piled them up in a heap and set them on fire.
Then the men and maidens danced, and sung in a circle round the blazing pile.
I lay quite quiet," said the Wind, "but I silently touched a branch which had been brought by one of the handsomest of the young men, and the wood blazed up brightly, blazed brighter than all the rest.
Then he was chosen as the chief, and received the name of the Shepherd; and might choose his lamb from among the maidens.
There was greater mirth and rejoicing than I had ever heard in the halls of the rich baronial house.
Then the noble lady drove by towards the baron's mansion with her three daughters, in a gilded carriage drawn by six horses.
The daughters were young and beautiful - three charming blossoms - a rose, a lily, and a white hyacinth.
The mother was a proud tulip, and never acknowledged the salutations of any of the men or maidens who paused in their sport to do her honor.
The gracious lady seemed like a flower that was rather stiff in the stalk.
Rose, lily, and hyacinth - yes, I saw them all three.
Whose little lambs will they one day become?
thought I; their shepherd will be a gallant knight, perhaps a prince.
The carriage rolled on, and the peasants resumed their dancing.
They drove about the summer through all the villages near.
But one night, when I rose again, the high-born lady lay down to rise again no more; that thing came to her which comes to us all, in which there is nothing new.
Waldemar Daa remained for a time silent and thoughtful.
'The loftiest tree may be bowed without being broken,' said a voice within him.
His daughters wept; all the people in the mansion wiped their eyes, but Lady Daa had driven away, and I drove away too," said the Wind.
"Whir-r-r, whir-r-r-!
"I returned again; I often returned and passed over the island of Funen and the shores of the Belt.
Then I rested by Borreby, near the glorious wood, where the heron made his nest, the haunt of the wood-pigeons, the blue-birds, and the black stork.
It was yet spring, some were sitting on their eggs, others had already hatched their young broods; but how they fluttered about and cried out when the axe sounded through the forest, blow upon blow!
The trees of the forest were doomed.
Waldemar Daa wanted to build a noble ship, a man-of-war, a three-decker, which the king would be sure to buy; and these, the trees of the wood, the landmark of the seamen, the refuge of the birds, must be felled.
The hawk started up and flew away, for its nest was destroyed; the heron and all the birds of the forest became homeless, and flew about in fear and anger.
I could well understand how they felt.
Crows and ravens croaked, as if in scorn, while the trees were cracking and falling around them.
Far in the interior of the wood, where a noisy swarm of laborers were working, stood Waldemar Daa and his three daughters, and all were laughing at the wild cries of the birds, excepting one, the youngest, Anna Dorothea, who felt grieved to the heart; and when they made preparations to fell a tree that was almost dead, and on whose naked branches the black stork had built her nest, she saw the poor little things stretching out their necks, and she begged for mercy for them, with the tears in her eyes.
So the tree with the black stork's nest was left standing; the tree itself, however, was not worth much to speak of.
Then there was a great deal of hewing and sawing, and at last the three-decker was built.
The builder was a man of low origin, but possessing great pride; his eyes and forehead spoke of large intellect, and Waldemar Daa was fond of listening to him, and so was Waldemar's daughter Ida, the eldest, now about fifteen years old; and while he was building the ship for the father, he was building for himself a castle in the air, in which he and Ida were to live when they were married.
This might have happened, indeed, if there had been a real castle, with stone walls, ramparts, and a moat.
But in spite of his clever head, the builder was still but a poor, inferior bird; and how can a sparrow expect to be admitted into the society of peacocks?
"I passed on in my course," said the Wind, "and he passed away also.
He was not allowed to remain, and little Ida got over it, because she was obliged to do so.
Proud, black horses, worth looking at, were neighing in the stable.
And they were locked up; for the admiral, who had been sent by the king to inspect the new ship, and make arrangements for its purchase, was loud in admiration of these beautiful horses.
I heard it all," said the Wind, "for I accompanied the gentlemen through the open door of the stable, and strewed stalks of straw, like bars of gold, at their feet.
Waldemar Daa wanted gold, and the admiral wished for the proud black horses; therefore he praised them so much.
But the hint was not taken, and consequently the ship was not bought.
It remained on the shore covered with boards, - a Noah's ark that never got to the water - Whir-r-r-r - and that was a pity.
"In the winter, when the fields were covered with snow, and the water filled with large blocks of ice which I had blown up to the coast," continued the Wind, "great flocks of crows and ravens, dark and black as they usually are, came and alighted on the lonely, deserted ship.
Then they croaked in harsh accents of the forest that now existed no more, of the many pretty birds' nests destroyed and the little ones left without a home; and all for the sake of that great bit of lumber, that proud ship, that never sailed forth.
I made the snowflakes whirl till the snow lay like a great lake round the ship, and drifted over it.
I let it hear my voice, that it might know what the storm has to say.
Certainly I did my part towards teaching it seamanship.
"That winter passed away, and another winter and summer both passed, as they are still passing away, even as I pass away.
The snow drifts onwards, the apple-blossoms are scattered, the leaves fall, - everything passes away, and men are passing away too.
But the great man's daughters are still young, and little Ida is a rose as fair to look upon as on the day when the shipbuilder first saw her.
I often tumbled her long, brown hair, while she stood in the garden by the apple-tree, musing, and not heeding how I strewed the blossoms on her hair, and dishevelled it; or sometimes, while she stood gazing at the red sun and the golden sky through the opening branches of the dark, thick foliage of the garden trees.
Her sister Joanna was bright and slender as a lily; she had a tall and lofty carriage and figure, though, like her mother, rather stiff in back.
She was very fond of walking through the great hall, where hung the portraits of her ancestors.
The women were represented in dresses of velvet and silk, with tiny little hats, embroidered with pearls, on their braided hair.
They were all handsome women.
The gentlemen appeared clad in steel, or in rich cloaks lined with squirrel's fur; they wore little ruffs, and swords at their sides.
Where would Joanna's place be on that wall some day?
and how would he look, - her noble lord and husband?
This is what she thought of, and often spoke of in a low voice to herself.
I heard it as I swept into the long hall, and turned round to come out again.
Anna Dorothea, the pale hyacinth, a child of fourteen, was quiet and thoughtful; her large, deep, blue eyes had a dreamy look, but a childlike smile still played round her mouth.
I was not able to blow it away, neither did I wish to do so.
We have met in the garden, in the hollow lane, in the field and meadow, where she gathered herbs and flowers which she knew would be useful to her father in preparing the drugs and mixtures he was always concocting.
Waldemar Daa was arrogant and proud, but he was also a learned man, and knew a great deal.
It was no secret, and many opinions were expressed on what he did.
In his fireplace there was a fire, even in summer time.
He would lock himself in his room, and for days the fire would be kept burning; but he did not talk much of what he was doing.
The secret powers of nature are generally discovered in solitude, and did he not soon expect to find out the art of making the greatest of all good things - the art of making gold?
So he fondly hoped; therefore the chimney smoked and the fire crackled so constantly.
Yes, I was there too," said the Wind.
"'Leave it alone,' I sang down the chimney; 'leave it alone, it will all end in smoke, air, coals, and ashes, and you will burn your fingers.
' But Waldemar Daa did not leave it alone, and all he possessed vanished like smoke blown by me.
The splendid black horses, where are they?
What became of the cows in the field, the old gold and silver vessels in cupboards and chests, and even the house and home itself?
It was easy to melt all these away in the gold-making crucible, and yet obtain no gold.
And so it was.
Empty are the barns and store-rooms, the cellars and cupboards; the servants decreased in number, and the mice multiplied.
First one window became broken, and then another, so that I could get in at other places besides the door.
'Where the chimney smokes, the meal is being cooked,' says the proverb; but here a chimney smoked that devoured all the meals for the sake of gold.
I blew round the courtyard," said the Wind, "like a watchman blowing his home, but no watchman was there.
I twirled the weather-cock round on the summit of the tower, and it creaked like the snoring of a warder, but no warder was there; nothing but mice and rats.
Poverty laid the table-cloth; poverty sat in the wardrobe and in the larder.
The door fell off its hinges, cracks and fissures made their appearance everywhere; so that I could go in and out at pleasure, and that is how I know all about it.
Amid smoke and ashes, sorrow, and sleepless nights, the hair and beard of the master of the house turned gray, and deep furrows showed themselves around his temples; his skin turned pale and yellow, while his eyes still looked eagerly for gold, the longed-for gold, and the result of his labor was debt instead of gain.
I blew the smoke and ashes into his face and beard; I moaned through the broken window-panes, and the yawning clefts in the walls; I blew into the chests and drawers belonging to his daughters, wherein lay the clothes that had become faded and threadbare, from being worn over and over again.
Such a song had not been sung, at the children's cradle as I sung now.
The lordly life had changed to a life of penury.
I was the only one who rejoiced aloud in that castle," said the Wind.
"At last I snowed them up, and they say snow keeps people warm.
It was good for them, for they had no wood, and the forest, from which they might have obtained it, had been cut down.
The frost was very bitter, and I rushed through loop-holes and passages, over gables and roofs with keen and cutting swiftness.
The three high-born daughters were lying in bed because of the cold, and their father crouching beneath his leather coverlet.
Nothing to eat, nothing to burn, no fire on the hearth!
Here was a life for high-born people!
'Give it up, give it up!
' But my Lord Daa would not do that.
'After winter, spring will come,' he said, 'after want, good times.
We must not lose patience, we must learn to wait.
Now my horses and lands are all mortgaged, it is indeed high time; but gold will come at last - at Easter.
'
"I heard him as he thus spoke; he was looking at a spider's web, and he continued, 'Thou cunning little weaver, thou dost teach me perseverance.
Let any one tear thy web, and thou wilt begin again and repair it.
Let it be entirely destroyed, thou wilt resolutely begin to make another till it is completed.
So ought we to do, if we wish to succeed at last.
'
"It was the morning of Easter-day.
The bells sounded from the neighboring church, and the sun seemed to rejoice in the sky.
The master of the castle had watched through the night, in feverish excitement, and had been melting and cooling, distilling and mixing.
I heard him sighing like a soul in despair; I heard him praying, and I noticed how he held his breath.
The lamp burnt out, but he did not observe it.
I blew up the fire in the coals on the hearth, and it threw a red glow on his ghastly white face, lighting it up with a glare, while his sunken eyes looked out wildly from their cavernous depths, and appeared to grow larger and more prominent, as if they would burst from their sockets.
'Look at the alchymic glass,' he cried; 'something glows in the crucible, pure and heavy. '
He lifted it with a trembling hand, and exclaimed in a voice of agitation, 'Gold!
gold!
' He was quite giddy, I could have blown him down," said the Wind; "but I only fanned the glowing coals, and accompanied him through the door to the room where his daughter sat shivering.
His coat was powdered with ashes, and there were ashes in his beard and in his tangled hair.
He stood erect, and held high in the air the brittle glass that contained his costly treasure. '
Found!
found!
Gold!
gold!
' he shouted, again holding the glass aloft, that it might flash in the sunshine; but his hand trembled, and the alchymic glass fell from it, clattering to the ground, and brake in a thousand pieces.
The last bubble of his happiness had burst, with a whiz and a whir, and I rushed away from the gold-maker's house.
"Late in the autumn, when the days were short, and the mist sprinkled cold drops on the berries and the leafless branches, I came back in fresh spirits, rushed through the air, swept the sky clear, and snapped off the dry twigs, which is certainly no great labor to do, yet it must be done.
There was another kind of sweeping taking place at Waldemar Daa's, in the castle of Borreby.
His enemy, Owe Ramel, of Basnas, was there, with the mortgage of the house and everything it contained, in his pocket.
I rattled the broken windows, beat against the old rotten doors, and whistled through cracks and crevices, so that Mr.
Owe Ramel did not much like to remain there.
Ida and Anna Dorothea wept bitterly, Joanna stood, pale and proud, biting her lips till the blood came; but what could that avail?
Owe Ramel offered Waldemar Daa permission to remain in the house till the end of his life.
No one thanked him for the offer, and I saw the ruined old gentleman lift his head, and throw it back more proudly than ever.
Then I rushed against the house and the old lime-trees with such force, that one of the thickest branches, a decayed one, was broken off, and the branch fell at the entrance, and remained there.
It might have been used as a broom, if any one had wanted to sweep the place out, and a grand sweeping-out there really was; I thought it would be so.
It was hard for any one to preserve composure on such a day; but these people had strong wills, as unbending as their hard fortune.
There was nothing they could call their own, excepting the clothes they wore.
Yes, there was one thing more, an alchymist's glass, a new one, which had been lately bought, and filled with what could be gathered from the ground of the treasure which had promised so much but failed in keeping its promise.
Waldemar Daa hid the glass in his bosom, and, taking his stick in his hand, the once rich gentleman passed with his daughters out of the house of Borreby.
I blew coldly upon his flustered cheeks, I stroked his gray beard and his long white hair, and I sang as well as I was able, 'Whir-r-r, whir-r-r. Gone away!
Gone away!
' Ida walked on one side of the old man, and Anna Dorothea on the other; Joanna turned round, as they left the entrance.
Why?
Fortune would not turn because she turned.
She looked at the stone in the walls which had once formed part of the castle of Marck Stig, and perhaps she thought of his daughters and of the old song, -
"The eldest and youngest, hand-in-hand,
Went forth alone to a distant land.
"
These were only two; here there were three, and their father with them also.
They walked along the high-road, where once they had driven in their splendid carriage; they went forth with their father as beggars.
They wandered across an open field to a mud hut, which they rented for a dollar and a half a year, a new home, with bare walls and empty cupboards.
Crows and magpies fluttered about them, and cried, as if in contempt, 'Caw, caw, turned out of our nest - caw, caw,' as they had done in the wood at Borreby, when the trees were felled.
Daa and his daughters could not help hearing it, so I blew about their ears to drown the noise; what use was it that they should listen?
So they went to live in the mud hut in the open field, and I wandered away, over moor and meadow, through bare bushes and leafless forests, to the open sea, to the broad shores in other lands, 'Whir-r-r, whir-r-r!
Away, away! '
year after year. "
And what became of Waldemar Daa and his daughters?
Listen; the Wind will tell us:
"The last I saw of them was the pale hyacinth, Anna Dorothea.
She was old and bent then; for fifty years had passed and she had outlived them all.
She could relate the history.
Yonder, on the heath, near the town of Wiborg, in Jutland, stood the fine new house of the canon.
It was built of red brick, with projecting gables.
It was inhabited, for the smoke curled up thickly from the chimneys.
The canon's gentle lady and her beautiful daughters sat in the bay-window, and looked over the hawthorn hedge of the garden towards the brown heath.
What were they looking at?
Their glances fell upon a stork's nest, which was built upon an old tumbledown hut.
The roof, as far as one existed at all, was covered with moss and lichen.
The stork's nest covered the greater part of it, and that alone was in a good condition; for it was kept in order by the stork himself.
That is a house to be looked at, and not to be touched," said the Wind. "
For the sake of the stork's nest it had been allowed to remain, although it is a blot on the landscape.
They did not like to drive the stork away; therefore the old shed was left standing, and the poor woman who dwelt in it allowed to stay.
She had the Egyptian bird to thank for that; or was it perchance her reward for having once interceded for the preservation of the nest of its black brother in the forest of Borreby?
At that time she, the poor woman, was a young child, a white hyacinth in a rich garden.
She remembered that time well; for it was Anna Dorothea.
"'O-h, o-h,' she sighed; for people can sigh like the moaning of the wind among the reeds and rushes. '
O-h, o-h,' she would say, 'no bell sounded at thy burial, Waldemar Daa.
The poor school-boys did not even sing a psalm when the former lord of Borreby was laid in the earth to rest.
O-h, everything has an end, even misery.
Sister Ida became the wife of a peasant; that was the hardest trial which befell our father, that the husband of his own daughter should be a miserable serf, whom his owner could place for punishment on the wooden horse.
I suppose he is under the ground now; and Ida - alas!
alas!
it is not ended yet; miserable that I am!
Kind Heaven, grant me that I may die. '
"That was Anna Dorothea's prayer in the wretched hut that was left standing for the sake of the stork.
I took pity on the proudest of the sisters," said the Wind.
"Her courage was like that of a man; and in man's clothes she served as a sailor on board ship.
She was of few words, and of a dark countenance; but she did not know how to climb, so I blew her overboard before any one found out that she was a woman; and, in my opinion, that was well done," said the Wind.
On such another Easter morning as that on which Waldemar Daa imagined he had discovered the art of making gold, I heard the tones of a psalm under the stork's nest, and within the crumbling walls.
It was Anna Dorothea's last song.
There was no window in the hut, only a hole in the wall; and the sun rose like a globe of burnished gold, and looked through.
With what splendor he filled that dismal dwelling!
Her eyes were glazing, and her heart breaking; but so it would have been, even had the sun not shone that morning on Anna Dorothea.
The stork's nest had secured her a home till her death.
I sung over her grave; I sung at her father's grave.
I know where it lies, and where her grave is too, but nobody else knows it.
"New times now; all is changed.
The old high-road is lost amid cultivated fields; the new one now winds along over covered graves; and soon the railway will come, with its train of carriages, and rush over graves where lie those whose very names are forgoten.
All passed away, passed away!
"This is the story of Waldemar Daa and his daughters.
Tell it better, any of you, if you know how," said the Wind; and he rushed away, and was gone.
There was once a woman who wished very much to have a little child, but she could not obtain her wish.
At last she went to a fairy, and said, "I should so very much like to have a little child; can you tell me where I can find one?
"
"Oh, that can be easily managed," said the fairy.
"Here is a barleycorn of a different kind to those which grow in the farmer's fields, and which the chickens eat; put it into a flower-pot, and see what will happen.
"
"Thank you," said the woman, and she gave the fairy twelve shillings, which was the price of the barleycorn.
Then she went home and planted it, and immediately there grew up a large handsome flower, something like a tulip in appearance, but with its leaves tightly closed as if it were still a bud.
"It is a beautiful flower," said the woman, and she kissed the red and golden-colored leaves, and while she did so the flower opened, and she could see that it was a real tulip.
Within the flower, upon the green velvet stamens, sat a very delicate and graceful little maiden.
She was scarcely half as long as a thumb, and they gave her the name of "Thumbelina," or Tiny, because she was so small.
A walnut-shell, elegantly polished, served her for a cradle; her bed was formed of blue violet-leaves, with a rose-leaf for a counterpane.
Here she slept at night, but during the day she amused herself on a table, where the woman had placed a plateful of water.
Round this plate were wreaths of flowers with their stems in the water, and upon it floated a large tulip-leaf, which served Tiny for a boat.
Here the little maiden sat and rowed herself from side to side, with two oars made of white horse-hair.
It really was a very pretty sight.
Tiny could, also, sing so softly and sweetly that nothing like her singing had ever before been heard.
One night, while she lay in her pretty bed, a large, ugly, wet toad crept through a broken pane of glass in the window, and leaped right upon the table where Tiny lay sleeping under her rose-leaf quilt.
"What a pretty little wife this would make for my son," said the toad, and she took up the walnut-shell in which little Tiny lay asleep, and jumped through the window with it into the garden.
In the swampy margin of a broad stream in the garden lived the toad, with her son.
He was uglier even than his mother, and when he saw the pretty little maiden in her elegant bed, he could only cry, "Croak, croak, croak.
"
"Don't speak so loud, or she will wake," said the toad, "and then she might run away, for she is as light as swan's down.
We will place her on one of the water-lily leaves out in the stream; it will be like an island to her, she is so light and small, and then she cannot escape; and, while she is away, we will make haste and prepare the state-room under the marsh, in which you are to live when you are married.
"
Far out in the stream grew a number of water-lilies, with broad green leaves, which seemed to float on the top of the water.
The largest of these leaves appeared farther off than the rest, and the old toad swam out to it with the walnut-shell, in which little Tiny lay still asleep.
The tiny little creature woke very early in the morning, and began to cry bitterly when she found where she was, for she could see nothing but water on every side of the large green leaf, and no way of reaching the land.
Meanwhile the old toad was very busy under the marsh, decking her room with rushes and wild yellow flowers, to make it look pretty for her new daughter-in-law.
Then she swam out with her ugly son to the leaf on which she had placed poor little Tiny.
She wanted to fetch the pretty bed, that she might put it in the bridal chamber to be ready for her.
The old toad bowed low to her in the water, and said, "Here is my son, he will be your husband, and you will live happily in the marsh by the stream. "
"Croak, croak, croak," was all her son could say for himself; so the toad took up the elegant little bed, and swam away with it, leaving Tiny all alone on the green leaf, where she sat and wept.
She could not bear to think of living with the old toad, and having her ugly son for a husband.
The little fishes, who swam about in the water beneath, had seen the toad, and heard what she said, so they lifted their heads above the water to look at the little maiden.
As soon as they caught sight of her, they saw she was very pretty, and it made them very sorry to think that she must go and live with the ugly toads.
"No, it must never be!
" so they assembled together in the water, round the green stalk which held the leaf on which the little maiden stood, and gnawed it away at the root with their teeth.
Then the leaf floated down the stream, carrying Tiny far away out of reach of land.
Tiny sailed past many towns, and the little birds in the bushes saw her, and sang, "What a lovely little creature;" so the leaf swam away with her farther and farther, till it brought her to other lands.
A graceful little white butterfly constantly fluttered round her, and at last alighted on the leaf.
Tiny pleased him, and she was glad of it, for now the toad could not possibly reach her, and the country through which she sailed was beautiful, and the sun shone upon the water, till it glittered like liquid gold.
She took off her girdle and tied one end of it round the butterfly, and the other end of the ribbon she fastened to the leaf, which now glided on much faster than ever, taking little Tiny with it as she stood.
Presently a large cockchafer flew by; the moment he caught sight of her, he seized her round her delicate waist with his claws, and flew with her into a tree.
The green leaf floated away on the brook, and the butterfly flew with it, for he was fastened to it, and could not get away.
Oh, how frightened little Tiny felt when the cockchafer flew with her to the tree!
But especially was she sorry for the beautiful white butterfly which she had fastened to the leaf, for if he could not free himself he would die of hunger.
But the cockchafer did not trouble himself at all about the matter.
He seated himself by her side on a large green leaf, gave her some honey from the flowers to eat, and told her she was very pretty, though not in the least like a cockchafer.
After a time, all the cockchafers turned up their feelers, and said, "She has only two legs!
how ugly that looks. " "
She has no feelers," said another. "
Her waist is quite slim.
Pooh!
she is like a human being. "
"Oh!
she is ugly," said all the lady cockchafers, although Tiny was very pretty.
Then the cockchafer who had run away with her, believed all the others when they said she was ugly, and would have nothing more to say to her, and told her she might go where she liked.
Then he flew down with her from the tree, and placed her on a daisy, and she wept at the thought that she was so ugly that even the cockchafers would have nothing to say to her.
And all the while she was really the loveliest creature that one could imagine, and as tender and delicate as a beautiful rose-leaf.
During the whole summer poor little Tiny lived quite alone in the wide forest.
She wove herself a bed with blades of grass, and hung it up under a broad leaf, to protect herself from the rain.
She sucked the honey from the flowers for food, and drank the dew from their leaves every morning.
So passed away the summer and the autumn, and then came the winter, - the long, cold winter.
All the birds who had sung to her so sweetly were flown away, and the trees and the flowers had withered.
The large clover leaf under the shelter of which she had lived, was now rolled together and shrivelled up, nothing remained but a yellow withered stalk.
She felt dreadfully cold, for her clothes were torn, and she was herself so frail and delicate, that poor little Tiny was nearly frozen to death.
It began to snow too; and the snow-flakes, as they fell upon her, were like a whole shovelful falling upon one of us, for we are tall, but she was only an inch high.
Then she wrapped herself up in a dry leaf, but it cracked in the middle and could not keep her warm, and she shivered with cold.
Near the wood in which she had been living lay a corn-field, but the corn had been cut a long time; nothing remained but the bare dry stubble standing up out of the frozen ground.
It was to her like struggling through a large wood.
Oh!
how she shivered with the cold.
She came at last to the door of a field-mouse, who had a little den under the corn-stubble.
There dwelt the field-mouse in warmth and comfort, with a whole roomful of corn, a kitchen, and a beautiful dining room.
Poor little Tiny stood before the door just like a little beggar-girl, and begged for a small piece of barley-corn, for she had been without a morsel to eat for two days.
"You poor little creature," said the field-mouse, who was really a good old field-mouse, "come into my warm room and dine with me.
" She was very pleased with Tiny, so she said, "You are quite welcome to stay with me all the winter, if you like; but you must keep my rooms clean and neat, and tell me stories, for I shall like to hear them very much.
" And Tiny did all the field-mouse asked her, and found herself very comfortable.
"We shall have a visitor soon," said the field-mouse one day; "my neighbor pays me a visit once a week.
He is better off than I am; he has large rooms, and wears a beautiful black velvet coat.
If you could only have him for a husband, you would be well provided for indeed.
But he is blind, so you must tell him some of your prettiest stories. "
But Tiny did not feel at all interested about this neighbor, for he was a mole.
However, he came and paid his visit dressed in his black velvet coat.
"He is very rich and learned, and his house is twenty times larger than mine," said the field-mouse.
He was rich and learned, no doubt, but he always spoke slightingly of the sun and the pretty flowers, because he had never seen them.
Tiny was obliged to sing to him, "Lady-bird, lady-bird, fly away home," and many other pretty songs.
And the mole fell in love with her because she had such a sweet voice; but he said nothing yet, for he was very cautious.
A short time before, the mole had dug a long passage under the earth, which led from the dwelling of the field-mouse to his own, and here she had permission to walk with Tiny whenever she liked.
But he warned them not to be alarmed at the sight of a dead bird which lay in the passage.
It was a perfect bird, with a beak and feathers, and could not have been dead long, and was lying just where the mole had made his passage.
The mole took a piece of phosphorescent wood in his mouth, and it glittered like fire in the dark; then he went before them to light them through the long, dark passage.
When they came to the spot where lay the dead bird, the mole pushed his broad nose through the ceiling, the earth gave way, so that there was a large hole, and the daylight shone into the passage.
In the middle of the floor lay a dead swallow, his beautiful wings pulled close to his sides, his feet and his head drawn up under his feathers; the poor bird had evidently died of the cold.
It made little Tiny very sad to see it, she did so love the little birds; all the summer they had sung and twittered for her so beautifully.
But the mole pushed it aside with his crooked legs, and said, "He will sing no more now.
How miserable it must be to be born a little bird!
I am thankful that none of my children will ever be birds, for they can do nothing but cry, 'Tweet, tweet,' and always die of hunger in the winter. "
"Yes, you may well say that, as a clever man!
" exclaimed the field-mouse, "What is the use of his twittering, for when winter comes he must either starve or be frozen to death.
Still birds are very high bred.
"
Tiny said nothing; but when the two others had turned their backs on the bird, she stooped down and stroked aside the soft feathers which covered the head, and kissed the closed eyelids.
"Perhaps this was the one who sang to me so sweetly in the summer," she said; "and how much pleasure it gave me, you dear, pretty bird. "
The mole now stopped up the hole through which the daylight shone, and then accompanied the lady home.
But during the night Tiny could not sleep; so she got out of bed and wove a large, beautiful carpet of hay; then she carried it to the dead bird, and spread it over him; with some down from the flowers which she had found in the field-mouse's room.
It was as soft as wool, and she spread some of it on each side of the bird, so that he might lie warmly in the cold earth.
"Farewell, you pretty little bird," said she, "farewell; thank you for your delightful singing during the summer, when all the trees were green, and the warm sun shone upon us.
" Then she laid her head on the bird's breast, but she was alarmed immediately, for it seemed as if something inside the bird went "thump, thump.
" It was the bird's heart; he was not really dead, only benumbed with the cold, and the warmth had restored him to life.
In autumn, all the swallows fly away into warm countries, but if one happens to linger, the cold seizes it, it becomes frozen, and falls down as if dead; it remains where it fell, and the cold snow covers it.
Tiny trembled very much; she was quite frightened, for the bird was large, a great deal larger than herself, - she was only an inch high.
But she took courage, laid the wool more thickly over the poor swallow, and then took a leaf which she had used for her own counterpane, and laid it over the head of the poor bird.
The next morning she again stole out to see him.
He was alive but very weak; he could only open his eyes for a moment to look at Tiny, who stood by holding a piece of decayed wood in her hand, for she had no other lantern.
"Thank you, pretty little maiden," said the sick swallow; "I have been so nicely warmed, that I shall soon regain my strength, and be able to fly about again in the warm sunshine. "
"Oh," said she, "it is cold out of doors now; it snows and freezes.
Stay in your warm bed; I will take care of you.
"
Then she brought the swallow some water in a flower-leaf, and after he had drank, he told her that he had wounded one of his wings in a thorn-bush, and could not fly as fast as the others, who were soon far away on their journey to warm countries.
Then at last he had fallen to the earth, and could remember no more, nor how he came to be where she had found him.
The whole winter the swallow remained underground, and Tiny nursed him with care and love.
Neither the mole nor the field-mouse knew anything about it, for they did not like swallows.
Very soon the spring time came, and the sun warmed the earth.
Then the swallow bade farewell to Tiny, and she opened the hole in the ceiling which the mole had made.
The sun shone in upon them so beautifully, that the swallow asked her if she would go with him; she could sit on his back, he said, and he would fly away with her into the green woods.
But Tiny knew it would make the field-mouse very grieved if she left her in that manner, so she said, "No, I cannot. "
"Farewell, then, farewell, you good, pretty little maiden," said the swallow; and he flew out into the sunshine.
Tiny looked after him, and the tears rose in her eyes.
She was very fond of the poor swallow.
"Tweet, tweet," sang the bird, as he flew out into the green woods, and Tiny felt very sad.
She was not allowed to go out into the warm sunshine.
The corn which had been sown in the field over the house of the field-mouse had grown up high into the air, and formed a thick wood to Tiny, who was only an inch in height.
"You are going to be married, Tiny," said the field-mouse.
"My neighbor has asked for you.
What good fortune for a poor child like you.
Now we will prepare your wedding clothes.
They must be both woollen and linen.
Nothing must be wanting when you are the mole's wife.
"
Tiny had to turn the spindle, and the field-mouse hired four spiders, who were to weave day and night.
Every evening the mole visited her, and was continually speaking of the time when the summer would be over.
Then he would keep his wedding-day with Tiny; but now the heat of the sun was so great that it burned the earth, and made it quite hard, like a stone.
As soon, as the summer was over, the wedding should take place.
But Tiny was not at all pleased; for she did not like the tiresome mole.
Every morning when the sun rose, and every evening when it went down, she would creep out at the door, and as the wind blew aside the ears of corn, so that she could see the blue sky, she thought how beautiful and bright it seemed out there, and wished so much to see her dear swallow again.
But he never returned; for by this time he had flown far away into the lovely green forest.
When autumn arrived, Tiny had her outfit quite ready; and the field-mouse said to her, "In four weeks the wedding must take place.
"
Then Tiny wept, and said she would not marry the disagreeable mole.
"Nonsense," replied the field-mouse.
"Now don't be obstinate, or I shall bite you with my white teeth.
He is a very handsome mole; the queen herself does not wear more beautiful velvets and furs.
His kitchen and cellars are quite full.
You ought to be very thankful for such good fortune.
"
So the wedding-day was fixed, on which the mole was to fetch Tiny away to live with him, deep under the earth, and never again to see the warm sun, because he did not like it.
The poor child was very unhappy at the thought of saying farewell to the beautiful sun, and as the field-mouse had given her permission to stand at the door, she went to look at it once more.
"Farewell bright sun," she cried, stretching out her arm towards it; and then she walked a short distance from the house; for the corn had been cut, and only the dry stubble remained in the fields.
"Farewell, farewell," she repeated, twining her arm round a little red flower that grew just by her side. "
Greet the little swallow from me, if you should see him again. "
"Tweet, tweet," sounded over her head suddenly.
She looked up, and there was the swallow himself flying close by.
As soon as he spied Tiny, he was delighted; and then she told him how unwilling she felt to marry the ugly mole, and to live always beneath the earth, and never to see the bright sun any more.
And as she told him she wept.
"Cold winter is coming," said the swallow, "and I am going to fly away into warmer countries.
Will you go with me?
You can sit on my back, and fasten yourself on with your sash.
Then we can fly away from the ugly mole and his gloomy rooms, - far away, over the mountains, into warmer countries, where the sun shines more brightly - than here; where it is always summer, and the flowers bloom in greater beauty.
Fly now with me, dear little Tiny; you saved my life when I lay frozen in that dark passage. "
"Yes, I will go with you," said Tiny; and she seated herself on the bird's back, with her feet on his outstretched wings, and tied her girdle to one of his strongest feathers.
Then the swallow rose in the air, and flew over forest and over sea, high above the highest mountains, covered with eternal snow.
Tiny would have been frozen in the cold air, but she crept under the bird's warm feathers, keeping her little head uncovered, so that she might admire the beautiful lands over which they passed.
At length they reached the warm countries, where the sun shines brightly, and the sky seems so much higher above the earth.
Here, on the hedges, and by the wayside, grew purple, green, and white grapes; lemons and oranges hung from trees in the woods; and the air was fragrant with myrtles and orange blossoms.
Beautiful children ran along the country lanes, playing with large gay butterflies; and as the swallow flew farther and farther, every place appeared still more lovely.
Tiny would have been frozen in the cold air, but she crept under the bird's warm feathers, keeping her little head uncovered, so that she might admire the beautiful lands over which they passed.
At length they reached the warm countries, where the sun shines brightly, and the sky seems so much higher above the earth.
Here, on the hedges, and by the wayside, grew purple, green, and white grapes; lemons and oranges hung from trees in the woods; and the air was fragrant with myrtles and orange blossoms.
At last they came to a blue lake, and by the side of it, shaded by trees of the deepest green, stood a palace of dazzling white marble, built in the olden times.
Vines clustered round its lofty pillars, and at the top were many swallows' nests, and one of these was the home of the swallow who carried Tiny.
"This is my house," said the swallow; "but it would not do for you to live there - you would not be comfortable.
You must choose for yourself one of those lovely flowers, and I will put you down upon it, and then you shall have everything that you can wish to make you happy.
"
"That will be delightful," she said, and clapped her little hands for joy.
A large marble pillar lay on the ground, which, in falling, had been broken into three pieces.
Between these pieces grew the most beautiful large white flowers; so the swallow flew down with Tiny, and placed her on one of the broad leaves.
But how surprised she was to see in the middle of the flower, a tiny little man, as white and transparent as if he had been made of crystal!
He had a gold crown on his head, and delicate wings at his shoulders, and was not much larger than Tiny herself.
He was the angel of the flower; for a tiny man and a tiny woman dwell in every flower; and this was the king of them all.
"Oh, how beautiful he is!
" whispered Tiny to the swallow.
The little prince was at first quite frightened at the bird, who was like a giant, compared to such a delicate little creature as himself; but when he saw Tiny, he was delighted, and thought her the prettiest little maiden he had ever seen.
He took the gold crown from his head, and placed it on hers, and asked her name, and if she would be his wife, and queen over all the flowers.
This certainly was a very different sort of husband to the son of a toad, or the mole, with my black velvet and fur; so she said, "Yes," to the handsome prince.
Then all the flowers opened, and out of each came a little lady or a tiny lord, all so pretty it was quite a pleasure to look at them.
Each of them brought Tiny a present; but the best gift was a pair of beautiful wings, which had belonged to a large white fly and they fastened them to Tiny's shoulders, so that she might fly from flower to flower.
Then there was much rejoicing, and the little swallow who sat above them, in his nest, was asked to sing a wedding song, which he did as well as he could; but in his heart he felt sad for he was very fond of Tiny, and would have liked never to part from her again.
"You must not be called Tiny any more," said the spirit of the flowers to her.
"It is an ugly name, and you are so very pretty.
We will call you Maia.
"
"Farewell, farewell," said the swallow, with a heavy heart as he left the warm countries to fly back into Denmark.
There he had a nest over the window of a house in which dwelt the writer of fairy tales.
The swallow sang, "Tweet, tweet," and from his song came the whole story.
There lived once a great queen, in whose garden were found at all seasons the most splendid flowers, and from every land in the world.
She specially loved roses, and therefore she possessed the most beautiful varieties of this flower, from the wild hedge-rose, with its apple-scented leaves, to the splendid Provence rose.
They grew near the shelter of the walls, wound themselves round columns and window-frames, crept along passages and over the ceilings of the halls.
They were of every fragrance and color.
But care and sorrow dwelt within these halls; the queen lay upon a sick bed, and the doctors declared that she must die.
"There is still one thing that could save her," said one of the wisest among them.
"Bring her the loveliest rose in the world; one which exhibits the purest and brightest love, and if it is brought to her before her eyes close, she will not die.
"
Then from all parts came those who brought roses that bloomed in every garden, but they were not the right sort.
The flower must be one from the garden of love; but which of the roses there showed forth the highest and purest love?
The poets sang of this rose, the loveliest in the world, and each named one which he considered worthy of that title; and intelligence of what was required was sent far and wide to every heart that beat with love; to every class, age, and condition.
"No one has yet named the flower," said the wise man.
"No one has pointed out the spot where it blooms in all its splendor.
It is not a rose from the coffin of Romeo and Juliet, or from the grave of Walburg, though these roses will live in everlasting song.
It is not one of the roses which sprouted forth from the blood-stained fame of Winkelreid.
The blood which flows from the breast of a hero who dies for his country is sacred, and his memory is sweet, and no rose can be redder than the blood which flows from his veins.
Neither is it the magic flower of Science, to obtain which wondrous flower a man devotes many an hour of his fresh young life in sleepless nights, in a lonely chamber.
"
"I know where it blooms," said a happy mother, who came with her lovely child to the bedside of the queen.
"I know where the loveliest rose in the world is.
It is seen on the blooming cheeks of my sweet child, when it expresses the pure and holy love of infancy; when refreshed by sleep it opens its eyes, and smiles upon me with childlike affection.
"
"This is a lovely rose," said the wise man; "but there is one still more lovely.
"
"Yes, one far more lovely," said one of the women.
"I have seen it, and a loftier and purer rose does not bloom.
But it was white, like the leaves of a blush-rose.
I saw it on the cheeks of the queen.
She had taken off her golden crown, and through the long, dreary night, she carried her sick child in her arms.
She wept over it, kissed it, and prayed for it as only a mother can pray in that hour of her anguish.
"
"Holy and wonderful in its might is the white rose of grief, but it is not the one we seek.
"
"No; the loveliest rose in the world I saw at the Lord's table," said the good old bishop.
"I saw it shine as if an angel's face had appeared.
A young maiden knelt at the altar, and renewed the vows made at her baptism; and there were white roses and red roses on the blushing cheeks of that young girl.
She looked up to heaven with all the purity and love of her young spirit, in all the expression of the highest and purest love.
"
"May she be blessed!
" said the wise man: "but no one has yet named the loveliest rose in the world.
"
Then there came into the room a child - the queen's little son.
Tears stood in his eyes, and glistened on his cheeks; he carried a great book and the binding was of velvet, with silver clasps.
"Mother," cried the little boy; "only hear what I have read.
" And the child seated himself by the bedside, and read from the book of Him who suffered death on the cross to save all men, even who are yet unborn.
He read, "Greater love hath no man than this," and as he read a roseate hue spread over the cheeks of the queen, and her eyes became so enlightened and clear, that she saw from the leaves of the book a lovely rose spring forth, a type of Him who shed His blood on the cross.
"I see it," she said.
"He who beholds this, the loveliest rose on earth, shall never die.
"