My grandfather took me to the fish pond on the farm when I was about seven, and he told me to throw a stone into the water.
He told me to watch the circles created by the stone.
Then he asked me to think of myself as that stone.
" You may create lots of splashes in your life, but the waves that come from those splashes will disturb the peace of all your fellow creatures," he said.
"Remember that you are responsible for what you put in your circle and that circle will also touch many other circles.
" You will need to live in a way that allows the good that comes from your circle to send the peace of that goodness to others.
The splash that comes from anger or jealousy will send those feelings to other circles.
You are responsible for both. "
That was the first time I realized that each person created the inner peace or discord that flowed out into the world.
We cannot create world peace if we are riddled with inner conflict, hatred, doubt or anger.
We radiate the feelings and thoughts that we hold inside, whether we speak them or not.
Whatever is splashing around inside of us is spilling out into the world, creating beauty or discord with all other circles of life.
I am a former elementary school music teacher from Seattle, Washington.
I've always supplemented my income by teaching piano lessons - something I've done for over 30 years.
Over the years I have found that children have many levels of musical ability.
I've never had the pleasure of having a protégé though I have taught some talented students.
However I've also had my share of what I call "Musically challenged" pupils.
One such student was Robert.
Robert was 11 years old when his mother (a single mom) dropped him off for his first piano lesson.
I prefer that students (especially boys!)
begin at an earlier age, which I explained to Robert.
But Robert said that it had always been his mother's dream to hear him play the piano.
So I took him as a student.
Well, Robert began with his piano lessons and from the beginning I thought it was a hopeless endeavor.
Much as Robert tried, he lacked the sense of tone and basic rhythm needed to excel.
But he dutifully reviewed his scales and some elementary pieces that I required all my students to learn.
Over the months he tried and tried while I listened and cringed and tried to encourage him.
At the end of each weekly lesson he'd always say, "My mom's going to hear me play some day. "
But it seemed hopeless.
He just did not have any inborn ability.
I only knew his mother from a distance as she dropped Robert off or waited in her aged car to pick him up.
She always waved and smiled but never stepped in.
Then one day Robert stopped coming to our lessons.
I thought about calling him but assumed, because of his lack of ability, that he had decided to pursue something else.
I also was glad that he stopped coming.
He was a bad advertisement for my teaching!
Several weeks later I mailed to the students homes a flyer on the upcoming recital.
To my surprise Robert (who received a flyer) asked me if he could be in the recital.
I told him that the recital was for current pupils and because he had dropped out he really did not qualify.
He said that his mom had been sick and unable to take him to piano lessons but he was still practicing.
" Miss Smith… I've just got to play! "
he insisted.
I don't know what led me to allow him to play in the recital.
Maybe it was his persistence or maybe it was something inside of me saying that it would be alright.
The night for the recital came.
The high school gymnasium was packed with parents, friends and relatives.
I put Robert up last in the program before I was to come up and thank all the students and play a finishing piece.
I thought that any damage he would do would come at the end of the program and I could always salvage his poor performance through my "curtain closer".
Well the recital went off without a hitch.
The students had been practicing and it showed.
Then Robert came up on stage.
His clothes were wrinkled and his hair looked like he'd run an egg-beater through it, "Why didn't he dress up like the other students? "
I thought. "
Why didn't his mother at least make him comb his hair for this special night? "
Robert pulled out the piano bench and he began.
I was surprised when he announced that he had chosen Mozart's Concerto #21 in C Major.
I was not prepared for what I heard next.
His fingers were light on the keys, they even danced nimbly on the ivories.
He went from pianissimo to fortissimo, from allegro to virtuoso.
His suspended chords that Mozart demands were magnificent!
Never had I heard Mozart played so well by people at his age.
After six and a half minutes he ended in a grand crescendo and everyone was on their feet in wild applause.
Overcome and in tears I ran up on stage and put my arms around Robert in joy. "
I've never heard you play like that, Robert!
How did you do it? "
Through the microphone Robert explained, "Well, Miss Smith… remember I told you my mom was sick?
Well, actually she had cancer and passed away this morning.
And well… she was born deaf, so tonight was the first time she had ever heard my play.
I wanted to make it special. "
There wasn't a dry eye in the house that evening.
As the people from Social Services led Robert from the stage to be placed into foster care, I noticed that even their eyes were red and puffy and I thought to myself how much richer my life had been for taking Robert as my pupil.
No, I've never had a protégé, but that night I became a protégé of Robert's.
He was the teacher and I was the pupil.
For it was he that taught me the meaning of perseverance and love and believing in yourself and maybe even taking a chance on someone even though you don't know why.
Once a circle missed a wedge.
The circle wanted to be whole, so it went around looking for its missing piece.
But because it was incomplete and therefore could roll only very slowly, it admired the flowers along the way.
It chatted with worms.
It enjoyed the sunshine.
It found lots of different pieces, but none of them fit.
So it left them all by the side of the road and kept on searching.
Then one day the circle found a piece that fit perfectly.
It was so happy.
Now it could be whole, with nothing missing.
It incorporated the missing piece into itself and began to roll.
Now that it was a perfect circle, it could roll very fast, too fast to notice flowers or talk to the worms.
When it realized how different the world seemed when it rolled so quickly, it stopped, left its found piece by the side of the road and rolled slowly away.
The lesson of the story, I suggested, was that in some strange sense we are more whole when we are missing something.
The man who has everything is in some ways a poor man.
He will never know what it feels like to yearn, to hope, to nourish his soul with the dream of something better.
He will never know the experience of having someone who loves him give him something he has always wanted or never had.
There is a wholeness about the person who has come to terms with his limitations, who has been brave enough to let go of his unrealistic dreams and not feel like a failure for doing so.
There is a wholeness about the man who has learned that he is strong enough to go through a tragedy and survive, he can lose someone and still feel like a complete person.
Life is not a spelling bee, where no matter how many words you've gotten right, you're disqualified if you make one mistake.
Life is more like a baseball season, where even the best team loses one-third of its games and even the worst team has its days of brilliance.
Our goal is to win more games than we lose.
When we accept that imperfection is part of being human, and when we can continue rolling through life and appreciate it, we will have achieved a wholeness that others can only aspire to.
If we are brave enough to love, strong enough to forgive, generous enough to rejoice in another's happiness, and wise enough to know there is enough love to go around for us all, then we can achieve a fulfillment that no other living creature will ever know.
One day, when I was a freshman in high school, I saw a kid from my class walking home from school.
His name was Carl.
It looked like he was carrying all of his books.
I thought to myself, "Why would anyone bring home all his books on a Friday?
He must really be a nerd. "
I had quite a weekend planned (parties and a football game with my friend tomorrow afternoon), so I shrugged my shoulders and went on.
As I was walking, I saw a bunch of kids running toward him.
They ran at him, knocking all his books out of his arms and tripping him so he landed in the dirt.
His glasses went flying, and I saw them land in the grass about ten feet from him.
He looked up and I saw this terrible sadness in his eyes.
My heart went out to him.
So, I jogged over to him and as he crawled around looking for his glasses I saw tears in his eyes.
As I handed him his glasses, I said, "Those guys are jerks.
They really should get lives. "
He looked at me and said, "Hey thanks!"
There was a big smile on his face.
It was one of those smiles that showed real gratitude.
I helped him pick up his books, and asked him where he lived.
As it turned out, he lived near me, so I asked him why I had never seen him before.
He said he had gone to private school before.
I would have never hung out with a private school kid before.
We talked all the way home, and I carried his books.
He turned out to be a pretty cool kid.
I asked him if he wanted to play football on Saturday with me and my friends.
He said yes.
We hung out all weekend and the more I got to know Carl, the more I liked him.
And my friends thought the same of him.
Monday morning came, and there was Carl with the huge stack of books again.
I stopped him and said, "Damn boy, you are gonna really build some serious muscles with this pile of books everyday! "
He just laughed and handed me half the books.
Over the next four years, Carl and I had become best friends.
When we were seniors, we began to think about college.
Carl decided on Georgetown, and I was going to Duke.
I knew that we would always be friends, that the miles would never be a problem.
He was going to be a doctor, and I was going for business on a football scholarship.
Carl was valedictorian of our class.
I teased him all the time about being a nerd.
He had to prepare a speech for graduation.
I was so glad it wasn't me having to get up there and speak.
On graduation day, I saw Carl.
He looked great.
He was one of those guys that really found himself during high school.
He filled out and actually looked good with glasses.
He had more dates than me and all the girls loved him!
Boy, sometimes I was jealous.
Today was one of those days.
I could see that he was nervous about his speech.
So, I smacked him on the back and said, "Hey, big guy, you'll be great!"He looked at me with one of those looks (the really grateful one) and smiled. "
Thanks!"
he said.
As he started his speech, he cleared his throat, and began: "Graduation is a time to thank those who helped you make it through those tough years.
Your parents, your teachers, your siblings, and maybe a coach… but mostly your friends.
I am here to tell all of you that being a friend to someone is the best gift you can give them.
I am going to tell you a story. "
I just looked at my friend with disbelief as he told the story of the first day we met.
He had planned to kill himself on the weekend.
He talked of how he had cleaned out his locker so his mom wouldn't have to do it later and was carrying his stuff home.
He looked hard at me and gave me a little smile. "
Thankfully, I was saved.
My friend saved me from doing the unspeakable. "
I heard the gasp go through the crowd as this handsome, popular boy told us all about his weakest moment.
I saw his mom and dad looking at me and smiling that same grateful smile.
Not until that moment did I realize its depth.
Twenty years ago, I drove a cab for a living.
It was a cowboy's life, a life for someone who wanted no boss.
What I did not realize was that it was also a ministry.
Because I drove the night shift, my cab became a moving confessional.
Passengers climbed in, sat behind me in total anonymity, and told me about their lives.
I encountered people whose lives amazed me, ennobled me, and made me laugh and weep.
But none touched me more than a woman I picked up late one August night.
I was responding to a call from a small brick fourplex in a quiet part of town.
I assumed I was being sent to pick up some people who had been partying or someone who had just had a fight with a lover, or a worker heading to an early shift at some factory for the industrial part of town.
When I arrived at 2:30 a.m., the building was dark except for a single light in a ground floor window.
Under such circumstances, many drivers just honk once or twice, wait a minute, and then drive away.
But I had seen too many impoverished people who depended on taxis as their only means of transportation.
Unless a situation smelled of danger, I always went to the door.
This passenger might be someone who needs my assistance, I reasoned to myself.
So I walked to the door and knocked. "
Just a minute," answered a frail, elderly voice.
I could hear something being dragged across the floor.
After a long pause, the door opened.
A small woman in her eighties stood before me.
She was wearing a print dress and a pillbox hat with a veil pinned on it, like somebody out of a 1940s movie.
By her side was a small nylon suitcase.
The apartment looked as if no one had lived in it for years.
All the furniture was covered with sheets.
There were no clocks on the walls, no knickknacks or utensils on the counters.
In the corner was a cardboard box filled with photos and glassware.
" Would you carry my bag out to the car? "
She said.
I took the suitcase to the cab, and then returned to assist the woman.
She took my arm, and we walked slowly toward the cab.
She kept thanking me for my kindness. "
It's nothing," I told her, "I just try to treat my passengers the way I would want my mother treated. "
Oh, you're such a good boy," she said.
When we got in the cab, she gave me an address, and then asked, "Can you drive through downtown?" "
It's not the shortest way," I answered quickly. "
Oh, I don't mind," she said, "I'm in no hurry.
I'm on my way to a hospice. "
I looked in the rear-view mirror.
Her eyes were glistening. "
I don't have any family left," she continued. "
The doctor says I don't have very long. "
I quietly reached over and shut off the meter.
"What route would you like me to take? "
I asked.
For the next two hours, we drove through the city.
She showed me the building where she had once worked as an elevator operator.
We drove through the neighborhood where she and her husband had lived when they were newlyweds.
She had me pull up in front of a furniture warehouse that had once been a ballroom where she had gone dancing as a girl.
Sometimes she'd ask me to slow in front of a particular building or corner and would sit staring into the darkness, saying nothing.
As the first hint of sun was creasing the horizon, she suddenly said, "I'm tired.
Let's go now. "
We drove in silence to the address she had given me.
It was a low building, like a small convalescent home, with a driveway that passed under a portico.
Two orderlies came out to the cab as soon as we pulled up.
They were solicitous and intent, watching her every move.
They must have been expecting her.
I opened the trunk and took the small suitcase to the door.
The woman was already seated in a wheelchair.
" How much do I owe you? "
she asked, reaching into her purse.
"Nothing," I said.
" You have to make a living," she answered.
" There are other passengers," I responded.
Almost without thinking, I bent and gave her a hug.
She held onto me tightly.
" You gave an old woman a little moment of joy," she said, "Thank you. "
I squeezed her hand, and then walked into the dim morning light.
Behind me, a door shut.
It was the sound of the closing of a life.
I didn't pick up any more passengers that shift.
I drove aimlessly, lost in thought.
For the rest of that day, I could hardly talk.
What if that woman had gotten an angry driver, or one who was impatient to end his shift?
What if I had refused to take the run, or had honked once, then driven away?
On a quick review, I don't think that I have done anything more important in my life.
We're conditioned to think that our lives revolve around great moments, but great moments often catch us unaware - beautifully wrapped in what others may consider a small one.
People may not remember exactly what you did, or what you said… but they will always remember how you made them feel.
Take a moment to stop and appreciate the memories you have made, the memory making opportunities around you and make someone feel special today.
A son and his father are walking in the valley.
Suddenly, the son falls, hurts himself and screams, "Ah - ! "
To his surprise, he hears the voice repeating, somewhere in the mountain, "Ah - ! "
Curious, he yells: "Who are you? "
He receives the answer, "Who are you? "
And then he screams to the mountain, "I admire you! "
The voice answers, "I admire you! "
Angered at the response, he screams, "Coward!"
He receives the answer, "Coward!"
He looks at his father and asks, "What's going on? "
His father smiles and says, "My son, pay attention! "
Again the father screams, "You are a champion! "
The voice answers, "You are a champion! "
The boy is surprised, but does not understand.
Then his father explains, "People call this echo, but really this is life.
If you want more love in the world, create more love in your heart.
Life will give you back everything you have given to it. "
Some time ago, Mary and I were visiting some friends in the country.
We were staying at a beautiful little guest cabin, surrounded by fruit trees, flowers and even a few goats.
Painted above the doorway in brightly colored, flowing letters were the words:
Your mind is a garden.
Your thoughts are the seeds.
You can grow flowers or
You can grow weeds.
Little did we know it at the time, but this little poem was to have a profound affect both on our thought patterns as well as our artworks.
It started almost as a kind of game.
We decided to make a real effort to watch our thoughts and see exactly what it was that we were planting in our own "Mind Garden".
It was difficult at first, but gradually, we began to pay more and more attention to what thoughts were repeatedly flashing across our minds.
How disturbing it was to discover that many of these "seeds" were extremely negative thoughts destined to grow patches of thorny thistles and stinging nettles in our daily lives!
We gradually came to see how so many of the problems and difficulties we were encountering in our lives had their beginnings in the seeds of doubt, fear and anxiety that we were continually planting in our minds.
It does take effort but like anything else it gets easier with practice, and the amazing thing is, as we became more and more aware of these negative thoughts we are able to say:
" No!
I will not plant this weed in the garden of my mind. "
I will consciously choose to plant something better.
The results are truly spectacular.
When you start to consciously cultivate your own mind garden, you will truly be amazed at the changes which begin to happen in your life.
Obstacles disappear, barriers fall away, and things that you once thought were either impossible or very far away will suddenly come into view.
Any garden is an ongoing process.
It's not enough to just plant a single seed of happiness and then forget about it.
Your frail little seedlings would soon be choked by weeds.
It is necessary to continuously pull out and throw away those weeds of fear, doubt and anxiety as soon as they appear.
Love, happiness and tranquility are all contagious.
People who are continuously planting these seeds in their own minds are also planting them in other people's.
Remember,
Your mind is a garden.
Your thoughts are the seeds.
You can grow flowers or
You can grow weeds.
So ask yourself, what are you going to grow in the glorious garden of your mind?
May your life be filled with love, happiness and inspiration.
Sometimes I really doubt whether there is love between my parents.
Every day they are very busy trying to earn money in order to pay the high tuition for my brother and me.
They don't act in the romantic ways that I read in books or I see on TV.
In their opinion, "I love you" is too luxurious for them to say.
Sending flowers to each other on Valentine's Day is even more out of the question.
My father has a bad temper.
When he's very tired from the hard work, it is easy for him to lose his temper.
One day, my mother was sewing a quilt.
I silently sat down beside her and looked at her.
" Mom, I have a question to ask you," I said after a while.
"What? "
she replied, still doing her work.
" Is there love between you and Dad? "
I asked her in a very low voice.
My mother stopped her work and raised her head with surprise in her eyes.
She didn't answer immediately.
Then she bowed her head and continued to sew the quilt.
I was very worried because I thought I had hurt her.
I was in great embarrassment and I didn't know what I should do.
But at last I heard my mother say the following words:
" Sara," she said thoughtfully, "look at this thread.
Sometimes it appears, but most of it disappears in the quilt.
The thread really makes the quilt strong and durable.
If life is a quilt, then love should be a thread.
It can hardly be seen anywhere or anytime, but it's really there.
Love is inside. "
I listened carefully but I couldn't understand her until the next spring.
At that time, my father suddenly got sick seriously.
My mother had to stay with him in the hospital for a month.
When they returned from the hospital, they both looked very pale.
It seemed both of them had had a serious illness.
After they were back, every day in the morning and dusk, my mother helped my father walk slowly on the country road.
My father had never been so gentle.
It seemed they were the most harmonious couple.
Along the country road, there were many beautiful flowers, green grass and trees.
The sun gently glistened through the leaves.
All of these made up the most beautiful picture in the world.
The doctor had said my father would recover in two months.
But after two months he still couldn't walk by himself.
All of us were worried about him.
" Dad, how are you feeling now? "
I asked him one day.
" Sara, don't worry about me. "
He said gently. "
To tell you the truth, I just like walking with your mom.
I like this kind of life. "
Reading his eyes, I know he loves my mother deeply.
Once I thought love meant flowers, gifts and sweet kisses.
But from this experience, I understand that love is just a thread in the quilt of our life.
Love is inside, making life strong and warm.
The pencil maker took the pencil aside, just before putting him into the box.
" There are 5 things you need to know," he told the pencil, "before I send you out into the world.
Always remember them and never forget, and you will become the best pencil you can be.
" One: You will be able to do many great things, but only if you allow yourself to be held in someone's hand.
" Two: You will experience a painful sharpening from time to time, but you'll need it to become a better pencil.
" Three: You will be able to correct any mistakes you might make.
"Four: The most important part of you will always be what's inside.
" And Five: On every surface you are used on, you must leave your mark.
No matter what the condition, you must continue to write. "
The pencil understood and promised to remember, and went into the box with purpose in its heart.
Now replacing the place of the pencil with you.
Always remember them and never forget, and you will become the best person you can be.
One: You will be able to do many great things, but only if you are willing to bring your talents into full play.
And allow other people to access you for the many gifts you possess.
Two: You will experience a painful sharpening from time to time, by going through various problems in life, but you'll need it to become a stronger person.
Three: You will be able to correct any mistakes you might make.
Four: The most important part of you will always be what's on the inside.
And Five: On every surface you walk through, you must leave your mark.
No matter what the situation, you must continue to do your duties.
Allow this parable on the pencil to encourage you to know that you are a special person and only you can fulfill the purpose to which you were born to accomplish.
Never allow yourself to get discouraged and think that your life is insignificant and cannot make a change.
1.
Don't spoil me．I know quite well that I ought not to have all I ask for.
I'm only testing you.
2.
Don't be afraid to be firm with me.
I prefer it, it makes me feel secure.
3.
Don't let me form bad habits.
I have to rely on you to detect them in the early stages.
4.
Don't make me feel smaller than I am.
It only makes me behave stupidly "big'.
5.
Don't correct me in front of people if you can help it.
I'll take much more notice if you talk quietly with me in private.
6.
Don't make me feel that my mistakes are sins.
It upsets my sense of values.
7.
Don't protect me from consequences.
I need to learn the painful way sometimes.
8.
Don't be too upset when I say "I hate you'.
Sometimes it isn't you I hate but your power to thwart me.
9.
Don't take too much notice of my small ailments.
Sometimes they get me the attention I need.
10.
Don't nag．If you do, I shall have to protect myself by appearing deaf.
11.
Don't forget that I cannot explain myself as well as I should like.
That is why I am not always accurate.
12.
Don't put me off when I ask questions.
If you do, you will find that I stop asking and seek my information elsewhere.
13.
Don't be inconsistent.
That completely confuses me and makes me lose faith in you.
14.
Don't tell me my fears are silly.
They are terribly real and you can do much to reassure me if you try to understand.
15.
Don't ever suggest that you are perfect or infallible.
It gives me too great a shock when I discover that you are neither.
16.
Don't ever think that it is beneath your dignity to apologize to me.
An honest apology makes me feel surprisingly warm towards you.
17.
Don't forget I love experimenting.
I couldn't get along without it, so please put up with it.
18.
Don't forget how quickly I am growing up.
It must be very difficult for you to keep pace with me, but please do try.
19.
Don't forget that I don't thrive without lots of love and understanding, but I don't need to tell you, do I?
20.
Please keep yourself fit and healthy.
I need you.
An elderly woman had two large pots, each hung on the ends of a pole which she carried across her neck.
One of the pots had a crack in it while the other pot was perfect and always delivered a full portion of water.
At the end of the long walk from the stream to the house, the cracked pot arrived only half full.
For a full two years this went on daily, with the woman bringing home only one and a half pots of water.
Of course, the perfect pot was proud of its accomplishments.
But the poor cracked pot was ashamed of its own imperfection, and miserable that it could only do half of what it had been made to do.
After 2 years of what it perceived to be bitter failure, it spoke to the woman one day by the stream,"I am ashamed of myself, because this crack in my side causes water to leak out all the way back to your house. "
The old woman smiled, "Did you notice that there are flowers on your side of the path, but not on the other pot's side?
That's because I have always known about your flaw, so I planted flower seeds on your side of the path, and every day while we walk back, you water them. "
" For two years I have been able to pick these beautiful flowers to decorate the table.
Without you being just the way you are, there would not be this beauty to grace the house. "
Each of us has our own unique flaw.
But it's the cracks and flaws we each have that make our lives together so interesting and rewarding.
You've just got to take each person for what they are and look for the good in them.
So, to all of my crackpot friends, have a great day and remember to smell the flowers on your side of the path!
My dad's company provided rental accommodations for its employees, usually in multi-level buildings.
We were on level four.
For two years, my dad had been pursuing his application for a ground level house to make the climb easier for my mom who had suffered complications after her second delivery.
She was advised bed rest and climbing the stairs every day was difficult for her.
As luck had it, just at that time, my dad's ground level application was granted and mom and dad were thrilled to move into the ground level accommodation in a separate building that was closer to my dad's office.
Without wasting time, they did the big move the following Saturday and mom was very relieved and excited.
The following Monday, when my dad returned from work and was about to enter the house, he saw an old lady and her old husband struggling to bring a wheelchair down the stairs.
He was shocked and moved.
When he ran to help them, the old lady said, "Don't worry, son.
We are used to it now.
We have been doing it for last 15 years for our disabled daughter.
Thank you for your help though. "
Her sad yet kind words stung my dad's heart like a thousand needles.
The following Saturday, my mom and dad swapped the apartment with the old couple and they were back to level 4 in the building.
I still have it in my memory even now that every time the old couple met my dad anywhere, they would just look at him with blessings in their tearful eyes and whisper "Angel!"
and would say to me, "You have an angel for a father! "
On a spring noon, I came home from work, seeing mother was airing her quilts.
That tempted me to air my own.
I carried my quilts out in the arms, and aired them at the ends of the clothesline.
After lunch, I went to work directly.
When I came home and stepped into my house doorway, I was greeted by my quilts just there.
Different from the noon, they had been moved to the sunniest place.
The snow-white linings of the quilts were gently gilded by the setting sun while my mother's quilts were hanging solitarily at the ends of the clothesline.
On them, the dumb shadows of the house were drawing their tedious and inerratic geometric figures.
Walking in front of my quilts, I stroked them.
They felt warm.
They were warm indeed, as warm as the palms of mother.
I also gave a touch to my mother's quilts.
They felt cool.
They were cool indeed, as cool as the backs of mother's hands.
All of a sudden, a stream of past scenes floated before my eyes: the bed-sheet with the finest quality in my home, the room in the best position, the potted flower in its lovely bloom, the most delicious dish, and even the bowl printed with the most delicate pattern… All these were mine, just as the sunshine zone where I stood.
I know that all these scenes are not happening by chance to mother.
On the road to the short livelong life, it might be your friends who can give you happiness; it might be your lover who can make you lovely; and it might be your career that can enrich you.
However, it must be your mother who makes you warm.
With the backs of her hands, she shelters you from hardships as many as possible; with her palms, she keeps shining over you the warm sunlight.
Mother is the eternal sunshine zone.
I loved you; even now I may confess,
Some embers of my love their fire retain;
But do not let it cause you more distress,
I do not want to sadden you again.
Hopeless and tongue-tied, yet I loved you dearly
With pangs the jealous and the timid know;
So tenderly I loved you, so sincerely,
I pray God grant another love you so.
A lecturer was giving a lecture to his students on stress management.
He raised a glass of water and asked the audience, "How heavy do you think this glass of water is? "
The students' answers ranged from 20g to 500g.
" It does not matter on the absolute weight.
It depends on how long you hold it.
If I hold it for a minute, it is OK.
If I hold it for an hour, I will have an ache in my right arm.
If I hold it for a day, you will have to call an ambulance.
It is the exact same weight, but the longer I hold it, the heavier it becomes. "
" If we carry our burdens all the time, sooner or later, we will not be able to carry on, the burden becoming increasingly heavier. "
" What you have to do is to put the glass down, rest for a while before holding it up again. "
We have to put down the burden periodically, so that we can be refreshed and are able to carry on.
So before you return home from work tonight, put the burden of work down.
Don't carry it back home.
You can pick it up tomorrow.
Whatever burdens you are having now on your shoulders, let it down for a moment if you can.
Life is short, enjoy it!
The passengers on the bus watched sympathetically as the attractive young woman with the white cane made her way carefully up the steps.
She paid the driver, used her hands to feel the location of the seats, walked down the aisle and found the seat that driver had told her was empty.
Then she settled in, placed her briefcase on her lap and rested her cane against her leg.
It had been a year since Jenny, 34, became blind.
Due to a medical misdiagnosis, she had been rendered sightless, and she was suddenly thrown into a world of darkness, anger, frustration and self-pity.
And all she had to cling to was her husband, Kevin.
Kevin was an Air Force officer and he loved Jenny with all his heart.
When she first lost her sight, he watched her sink into despair and was determined to help his wife gain the strength and confidence.
She needed to become independent again.
Finally, Jenny felt ready to return to her job, but how would she get there?
She used to take the bus, but now she was too frightened to get around the city by herself.
Kevin volunteered to drive her to work each day, even though they worked at opposite ends of the city.
At first, this comforted Jenny, and fulfilled Kevin's need to protect his sightless wife who was so insecure about performing the slightest task.
Soon, however, Kevin realized the arrangement wasn't working.
Jenny had to start taking the bus again, he admitted to himself.
But she was still so fragile, so angry - how would she react?
Just as he predicted, Jenny was horrified at the idea of taking the bus again.
" I'm blind! "
she responded bitterly. "
How am I supposed to know where I am going?
I feel like you're abandoning me. "
Kevin's heart was broken to hear these words, but he knew what had to be done.
He promised Jenny that each morning and evening he would ride the bus with her, for as long as it took, until she got the hang of it.
And that is exactly what happened.
For two solid weeks, Kevin accompanied Jenny to and from work each day.
He taught her how to rely on her other senses, specifically her hearing, to determine where she was and how to adapt to her new environment.
He helped her be friendly to the bus drivers who could watch out for her, and save her a seat.
Finally, Jenny decided that she was ready to try the trip on her own.
Monday morning arrived, and before she left, she threw her arms around Kevin, her temporary bus-riding companion, her husband, and her best friend.
Her eyes were filled with tears of gratitude for his loyalty, his patience, and his love.
She said good-bye, and for the first time, they went their separate ways.
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday… Each day on her own went perfectly, and Jenny had never felt better.
She was doing it!
She was going to work all by herself.
On Friday morning, Jenny took the bus to work as usual.
As she was paying the fare to exit the bus, the driver said: "I sure do envy you. "
Jenny wasn't sure if the driver was speaking to her or not.
After all, who on earth would ever envy a blind woman?
Curiously, she asked the driver: "Why do you say that you envy me?"
The driver responded: "It must feel good to be taken care of and protected like you are. "
Jenny had no idea what the driver was talking about, and again asked: "What do you mean?"
The driver answered: "You know, every morning for the past week, a fine-looking gentleman in a military uniform has been standing across the corner watching you as you get off the bus.
He makes sure you cross the street safely and he watches until you enter your office building.
Then he blows you a kiss, and walks away.
You are one lucky lady. "
Tears of happiness poured down Jenny's cheeks.
For although she couldn't physically see him, she had always felt Kevin's presence.
She was lucky, so lucky, for he had given her a gift more powerful than sight, a gift she didn't need to see to believe - the gift of love that can bring light where there is darkness.
Every year on my birthday, from the time I turned 12, a white gardenia was delivered to my house.
No card or note came with it.
Calls to the florist were always in vain - it was a cash purchase.
After a while I stopped trying to discover the sender's identity and just delighted in the beauty and heady perfume of that one magical, perfect white flower nestled in soft pink tissue paper.
But I never stopped imagining who the anonymous giver might be.
Some of my happiest moments were spent daydreaming about someone wonderful but too shy or eccentric to make known his or her identity.
My mother contributed to these imaginings.
She'd ask me if there was someone for whom I had done a special kindness who might be showing appreciation.
Perhaps the neighbor I'd help when she was unloading a car full of groceries.
Or maybe it was the old man across the street whose mail I retrieved during the winter so he wouldn't have to venture down his icy steps.
As a teenager, though, I had more fun speculating that it might be a boy I had a crush on or one who had noticed me even though I don't know him.
When I was 17, a boy broke my heart.
The night he called for the last time, I cried myself to sleep.
When I awoke in the morning, there was a message scribbled on my mirror in red lipstick: "Heartily know, when half-gods go, the gods arrive. "
I thought about that quotation from Emerson for a long time, and until my heart healed, I left it where my mother had written it.
When I finally went to get the glass cleaner, my mother knew everything was all right again.
I don't remember ever slamming my door in anger at her and shouting, "You just don't understand!"
because she did understand.
One month before my high-school graduation, my father died of a heart attack.
My feelings ranged from grief to abandonment, fear and overwhelming anger that my dad was missing some of the most important events in my life.
I became completely uninterested in my upcoming graduation, the senior-class play and the prom.
But my mother, in the midst of her own grief, would not hear of my skipping any of those things.
The day before my father died, my mother and I had gone shopping for a prom dress.
We'd found a spectacular one, with yards and yards of dotted Swiss in red, white and blue, it made me feel like Scarlett O'Hara, but it was the wrong size.
When my father died, I forgot about the dress.
My mother didn't.
The day before the prom, I found that dress - in the right size - draped majestically over the living-room sofa.
It wasn't just delivered, still in the box.
It was presented to me - beautifully, artistically, lovingly.
I didn't care if I had a new dress or not.
But my mother did.
She wanted her children to feel loved and lovable, creative and imaginative, imbued with a sense that there was magic in the world and beauty even in the face of adversity.
In truth, my mother wanted her children to see themselves much like the gardenia - lovely, strong and perfect - with an aura of magic and perhaps a bit of mystery.
My mother died ten days after I married.
I was 22 years old.
That was the year the gardenias stopped coming.
Laugh, and the world laughs with you;
Weep, and you weep alone.
For the sad old earth must borrow its mirth,
But has trouble enough of its own.
Sing, and the hills will answer;
Sigh, it is lost on the air.
The echoes bound to a joyful sound,
But shrink from voicing care.
Rejoice, and men will seek you;
Grieve, and they turn and go.
They want full measure of all your pleasure,
But they do not need your woe.
Be glad, and your friends are many;
Be sad, and you lose them all.
There are none to decline your nectared wine,
But alone you must drink life's gall.
Feast, and your halls are crowded;
Fast, and the world goes by.
Succeed and give, and it helps you live,
But no man can help you die.
There is room in the halls of pleasure
For a long and lordly train,
But one by one we must all file on
Through the narrow aisles of pain.
It was a bitter cold evening in northern Virginia many years ago.
The old man's beard was glazed by winter's frost while he waited for a ride across the river.
The wait seemed endless.
His body became numb and stiff from the frigid north wind.
He heard the faint, steady rhythm of approaching hooves galloping along the frozen path.
Anxiously, he watched as several horsemen rounded the bend.
He let the first one pass by without an effort to get his attention.
Then another passed by, and another.
Finally, the last rider neared the spot where the old man sat like a snow statue.
As this one drew near, the old man caught the rider's eye and said, "Sir, would you mind giving an old man a ride to the other side?
There doesn't appear to be a passageway by foot. "
Reining his horse, the rider replied, "Sure thing.
Hop aboard. "
Seeing the old man was unable to lift his half-frozen body from the ground, the horseman dismounted and helped the old man onto the horse.
The horseman took the old man not just across the river, but to his destination, which was just a few miles away.
As they neared the tiny but cozy cottage, the horseman's curiosity caused him to inquire, "Sir, I notice that you let several other riders pass by without making an effort to secure a ride.
Then I came up and you immediately asked me for a ride.
I'm curious why, on such a bitter winter night, you wait and ask the last rider.
What if I had refused and left you there? "
The old man lowered himself slowly down from the horse, looked the rider straight in the eyes, and replied, "I've been there for some time.
I reckon I know people pretty good.
I looked into the eyes of the other riders and immediately saw there was no concern for my situation.
It would have been useless even to ask them for a ride.
But when I looked into your eyes, kindness and compassion were evident.
I knew, then and there, that your gentle spirit would welcome the opportunity to give me assistance in my time of need. "
Those heartwarming comments touched the horseman deeply. "
I'm most grateful for what you have said. "
He told the old man. "
May I never get too busy in my own affairs that I fail to respond to the needs of others with kindness and compassion. "
With that, Thomas Jefferson turned his horse around and made his way back to the White House.
Though there is much to be concerned about, there is far, far more for which to be thankful.
Though life's goodness can at times be overshadowed, it is never outweighed.
For every single act that is senselessly destructive, there are thousands more small, quiet acts of love, kindness and compassion.
For every person who seeks to hurt, there are many, many more who devote their lives to helping and to healing.
There is goodness to life that cannot be denied.
In the most magnificent vistas and in the smallest details, look closely, for that goodness always comes shining through.
There is no limit to the goodness of life.
It grows more abundant with each new encounter.
The more you experience and appreciate the goodness of life, the more there is to be lived.
Even when the cold winds blow and the world seems to be covered in foggy shadows, the goodness of life lives on.
Open your eyes, open your heart, and you will see that goodness is everywhere.
Though the goodness of life seems at times to suffer setbacks, it always endures.
For in the darkest moment it becomes vividly clear that life is a priceless treasure.
And so the goodness of life is made even stronger by the very things that would oppose it.
Time and time again when you feared it was gone forever you found that the goodness of life was really only a moment away.
Around the next corner, inside every moment, the goodness of life is there to surprise and delight you.
Take a moment to let the goodness of life touch your spirit and calm your thoughts.
Then, share your good fortune with another.
For the goodness of life grows more and more magnificent each time it is given away.
Though the problems constantly scream for attention and the conflicts appear to rage ever stronger, the goodness of life grows stronger still, quietly, peacefully, with more purpose and meaning than ever before.
In 1945, a 12-year-old boy saw something in a shop window that set his heart racing.
But the price - five dollars - was far beyond Robin Marx's means.
Five dollars would buy almost a week's groceries for his family.
Robin couldn't ask his father for the money.
Everything Birch Marx made through fishing in Bay Roberts, Newfoundland, Canada.
Robin's mother, Debby, stretched like elastic to feed and clothe their five children.
Nevertheless, he opened the shop's weathered door and went inside.
Standing proud and straight in his flour-sack shirt and washed-out trousers, he told the shopkeeper what he wanted, adding, "But I don't have the money right now.
Can you please hold it for me for some time? "
" I'll try," the shopkeeper smiled. "
Folks around here don't usually have that kind of money to spend on things.
It should keep for a while. "
Robin respectfully touched his worn cap and walked out into the sunlight with the bay rippling in a freshening wind.
There was purpose in his loping stride.
He would raise the five dollars and not tell anybody.
Hearing the sound of hammering from a side street, Robin had an idea.
He ran towards the sound and stopped at a construction site.
People built their own homes in Bay Roberts, using nails purchased in hessian sacks from a local factory.
Sometimes the sacks were discarded in the flurry of building, and Robin knew he could sell them back to the factory for five cents a piece.
That day he found two sacks, which he took to the rambling wooden factory and sold to the man in charge of packing nails.
The boy's hand tightly clutched the five-cent pieces as he ran the two kilometers home.
Near his house stood the ancient barn that housed the family's goats and chickens.
Robin found a rusty soda tin and dropped his coins inside.
Then he climbed into the loft of the barn and hid the tin beneath a pile of sweet smelling hay.
It was dinnertime when Robin got home.
His father sat at the big kitchen table, working on a fishing net.
Debby was at the kitchen stove, ready to serve dinner as Robin took his place at the table.
He looked at his mother and smiled.
Sunlight from the window gilded her shoulder-length blonde hair.
Slim and beautiful, she was the center of the home, the glue that held it together.
Her chores were never-ending.
Sewing clothes for her family on the old Singer treadle machine, cooking meals and baking bread, planting and tending a vegetable garden, milking the goats and scrubbing soiled clothes on a washboard.
But she was happy.
Her family and their well-being were her highest priority.
Every day after chores and school, Robin scoured the town, collecting the hessian nail bags.
On the day the two-room school closed for the summer, no student was more delighted than Robin.
Now he would have more time for his mission.
All summer long, despite chores at home weeding and watering the garden, cutting wood and fetching water - Robin kept to his secret task.
Then all too soon the garden was harvested, the vegetables canned and stored, and the school reopened.
Soon the leaves fell and the winds blew cold and gusty from the bay.
Robin wandered the streets, diligently searching for his hessian treasures.
Often he was cold, tired and hungry, but the thought of the object in the shop window sustained him.
Sometimes his mother would ask, "Robin, where were you?
We were waiting for you to have dinner. "
"Playing, Mum.
Sorry. "
Debby would look at his face and shake her head.
Boys.
Finally spring burst into glorious green and Robin's spirits erupted.
The time had come!
He ran into the barn, climbed to the hayloft and uncovered the tin can.
He poured the coins out and began to count.
Then he counted again.
He needed 20 cents more.
Could there be any sacks left anywhere in town?
He had to find four and sell them before the day ended.
Robin ran down Water Street.
The shadows were lengthening when Robin arrived at the factory.
The sack buyer was about to lock up.
"Mister!
Please don't close up yet. "
The man turned and saw Robin, dirty and sweat stained.
"Come back tomorrow, boy. "
" Please, Mister.
I have to sell the sacks now - please. "
The man heard a tremor in Robin's voice and could tell he was close to tears.
" Why do you need this money so badly? "
" It's a secret. "
The man took the sacks, reached into his pocket and put four coins in Robin's hand.
Robin murmured a thank-you and ran home.
Then, clutching the tin can, he headed for the shop.
" I have the money," he solemnly told the owner.
The man went to the window and retrieved Robin's treasure.
He wiped the dust off and gently wrapped it in brown paper.
Then he placed the parcel in Robin's hands.
Racing home, Robin burst through the front door.
His mother was scrubbing the kitchen stove. "
Here, Mum!
Here!"
Robin exclaimed as he ran to her side.
He placed a small box in her work-roughened hand.
She unwrapped it carefully, to save the paper.
A blue-velvet jewel box appeared.
Debby lifted the lid, tears beginning to blur her vision.
In gold lettering on a small, almond-shaped brooch was the word Mother.
It was Mother's Day, 1946.
Debby had never received such a gift; she had no finery except her wedding ring.
Speechless, she smiled radiantly and gathered her son into her arms.
Once upon a time, the colors of the world started to quarrel.
All claimed that they were the best, the most important, the most useful, and the most favorite.
Green said,
" Clearly I am the most important.
I am the sign of life and of hope.
I was chosen for grass, trees and leaves.
Without me, all animals would die.
Look over the countryside and you will see that I am in the majority. "
Blue interrupted,
" You only think about the Earth, but consider the sky and the sea.
It is the water that is the basis of life and drawn up by the clouds from the deep sea.
The sky gives space and peace and serenity.
Without me, you would all be nothing. "
Yellow chuckled,
" You are all so serious.
I bring laughter, gaiety and warmth into the world.
The sun is yellow; the moon is yellow; the stars are yellow.
Every time you look at a sunflower, the whole world starts to smile.
Without me, there would be no fun.'
Orange started next to blow her trumpet,
" I am the color of health and strength.
I may be scarce, but I am precious for that I serve the needs of human life.
I carry the most important vitamins.
Think of carrots, pumpkins, oranges, mangoes, and papayas.
I don't hang around all the time, but when I fill the sky at sunrise or sunset, my beauty is so striking that no one gives another thought to any of you. "
Red could stand it no longer, so he shouted out,
" I am the ruler of all of you.
I am blood, life's blood!
I am the color of danger and of bravery.
I am willing to fight for a cause.
I bring fire into the blood.
Without me, the Earth would be as empty as the moon.
I am the color of passion and of love, of the red rose, of the poinsettia and the poppy. "
Purple rose up to his full height.
He was very tall and spoke with great pomp,
" I am the color of royalty and power.
Kings, chiefs, and bishops have always chosen me for that I am the sign of authority and wisdom.
People do not question me!
They listen and obey. "
Finally Indigo spoke, much more quietly than all the others, but with just as much determination,
"Think of me.
I am the color of silence.
You hardly notice me, but without me you all become superficial.
I represent thought and reflection, twilight and deep water.
You need me for balance and contrast, for prayer and inner peace. "
And so the colors went on boasting, each trying to convince of his or her own superiority.
Their quarreling became louder and louder.
Suddenly a startling flash of bright lightening thunder rolled and boomed.
Rain started to pour down relentlessly.
The colors crouched down in fear, drawing close to one another for comfort.
In the midst of the clamor, rain began to speak,
" You foolish colors, fighting amongst yourselves, each trying to dominate the rest.
Don't you know that you were each made for a special purpose, unique and different?
Join hands with one another and come to me. "
Doing as they were told, the colors united and joined hands.
The rain continued,
" From now on, when it rains, each of you will stretch across the sky in a great bow of color as a reminder that you can all live in peace.
Rainbow is a sign of hope for tomorrow. "
And so, whenever a good rain washes the world, a Rainbow appears in the sky.
Let us remember to appreciate one another.
From the very beginning, the girl's family objected strongly to her dating this guy, saying that it got to do with family background and that the girl would have to suffer for the rest of her life if she were to be with him.
Due to family's pressure, the couple quarreled very often.
Though the girl loved the guy deeply, she always asked him, "How deep is your love for me? "
As the guy is not good at his words, this often caused the girl to be very upset.
With that and the family's pressure, the girl often vented her anger on him.
As for him, he only endured it in silence.
After a couple of years, the guy finally graduated and decided to further his studies overseas.
Before leaving, he proposed to the girl, "I'm not very good with words.
But all I know is that I love you.
If you allow me, I will take care of you for the rest of my life.
As for your family, I'll try my best to talk them round.
Will you marry me? "
The girl agreed, and with the guy's determination, the family finally gave in and agreed to let them get married.
So before he left, they got engaged.
The girl went out to the working society, whereas the guy was overseas, continuing his studies.
They sent their love through e-mails and phone calls.
Though it was hard, both never thought of giving up.
One day, while the girl was on her way to work, she was knocked down by a car that lost control.
When she woke up, she saw her parents beside her bed.
She realized that she was badly injured.
Seeing her mum crying, she wanted to comfort her.
But she realized that all that could come out of her mouth was just a sigh.
She had lost her voice…
The doctors said that the impact on her brain had caused her to lose her voice.
Listening to her parents' comfort, but with nothing coming out from her, she broke down.
During the stay in hospital, there was only silent cry companying her.
Upon reaching home, everything seemed to be the same, except for the ringing tone of the phone, which pierced into her heart every time it rang.
She did not wish to let the guy know her situation, and not wanting to be a burden to him, she wrote a letter to him saying that she did not want to wait for him any longer.
With that, she sent the ring back to him.
In return, the guy sent millions and millions of replies and made countless phone calls.
The parents decided to move away, hoping that she could eventually forget everything and be happy.
In the new environment, the girl learned sign language and started a new life, telling herself that she must forget the guy.
One day, her friend came and told her that he was back.
She asked her friend not to let him know what happened to her.
Since then, there wasn't any news of him.
A year passed and her friend came with an envelope, containing an invitation card for the guy's wedding.
The girl was shattered.
When she opened it, she saw her name in it instead.
When she was about to ask her friend what was going on, she saw the guy standing in front of her.
He used sign language telling her: "I've spent a year's time learning sign language just to let you know that I've not forgotten our promise.
Let me have the chance to be your voice.
I Love You. "
With that, he slipped the ring back onto her finger.
The girl finally smiled.
We do not know what our future holds.
Sometimes it's hard but later you realize whatever happens for the best.
Never be faint-hearted or lose hope because surely after every hardship there is a better life to come…
I woke up early today, excited over all I get to do before the clock strikes midnight.
I have responsibilities to fulfill today.
I am important.
My job is to choose what kind of day I am going to have.
Today I can complain because the weather is rainy or I can be thankful that the grass is getting watered for free.
Today I can feel sad that I don't have more money or I can be glad that my finances encourage me to plan my purchases wisely and guide me away from waste.
Today I can grumble about my health or I can rejoice that I am alive.
Today I can lament over all that my parents didn't give me when I was growing up or I can feel grateful that they allowed me to be born.
Today I can cry because roses have thorns or I can celebrate that thorns have roses.
Today I can mourn my lack of friends or I can excitedly embark upon a quest to discover new relationships.
Today I can murmur dejectedly because I have to do housework or I can feel honored because I own shelter for my body and soul.
What today will be like is up to me.
I get to choose what kind of day I will have!
I was not a particularly happy child, and like most teenagers, I reveled in my angst.
One day, however, it occurred to me that I was taking the easy way out.
Anyone could be unhappy; it took no courage or effort.
True challenge lay in struggling to be happy.
The notion that we have to work at happiness comes as news to many people.
We assume it's a feeling that comes as a result of good things that just happen to us, things over which we have little or no control.
But the opposite is true: happiness is largely under our control.
It is a battle to be waged and not a feeling to be awaited.
To achieve a happier life, it's necessary to overcome some stumbling blocks, three of which are:
Comparison with Others Most of us compare ourselves with anyone we think is happier - a relative, an acquaintance or, often, someone we barely know.
I once met a young man who struck me as particularly successful and happy.
He spoke of his love for his beautiful wife and their daughters, and of his joy at being a radio talk-show host in a city he loved.
I remember thinking he was one of those lucky few for whom everything goes effortlessly right.
Then we started talking about the Internet.
He blessed its existence, he told me, because he could look up information on multiple sclerosis - the terrible disease afflicting his wife.
I felt like a fool for assuming nothing unhappy existed in his life.
Images of Perfection Almost any of us have images of how life should be.
The problem, of course, is that only rarely do people's jobs, spouses and children live up to these imagined ideals.
Here's a personal example: No one in my family had ever divorced.
I assumed that marriage was for life.
So when my wife and I divorced three years after the birth of our son, my world caved in.
I was a failure in my own eyes.
I later remarried but confided to my wife, Kelsey, that I couldn't shake the feeling that my family life had failed.
She asked me what was wrong with our family now (which included her daughter from a previous marriage and my son).
I had to admit that, aside from the pain of being with my son only half the time (my ex-wife and I shared custody), our family life was wonderful.
" Then why don't you celebrate it? "
she asked.
That's what I decided to do.
But first I had to get rid of the image of "perfect" family.
" Missing Tile" Syndrome One effective way of sabotaging happiness is to look at something and be fixated on even the smallest flaw.
It's like looking up at a tiled ceiling and concentrating on the space where one tile is missing.
As a bald man told me,"Whenever I enter a room, all I see is hair. "
Once you've determined what your missing tile is, explore whether acquiring it will really make you happy.
Then do one of three things: get it, replace it with a different tile, or forget about it and focus on the tiles in your life that are not missing.
I've spent years studying happiness, and one of the most significant conclusions I've drawn is this: there is little correlation between the circumstances of people's lives and how happy they are.
A moment's reflection should make this obvious.
We all know people who have had a relatively easy life yet are essentially unhappy.
And we know people who have suffered a great deal but generally remain happy.
The first secret is gratitude.
All happy people are grateful.
Ungrateful people cannot be happy.
We tend to think that being unhappy leads people to complain, but it's truer to say that complaining leads to people becoming unhappy.
The second secret is realizing that happiness is a by-product of something else.
The most obvious sources are those pursuits that give our lives purpose - anything from studying insects to playing baseball.
The more passions we have, the more happiness we're likely to experience.
Finally, the belief that something permanent transcends us and that our existence has some larger meaning can help us be happier.
We need a spiritual or religious faith, or a philosophy of life.
Your philosophy should encompass this truism: if you choose to find the positive in virtually every situation, you will be blessed, and if you choose to find the awful, you will be cursed.
As with happiness itself, this is largely your decision to make.
Isn't it amazing how one person, sharing one idea, at the right time and place can change the course of your life's history?
This is certainly what happened in my life.
When I was 14, I was hitchhiking from Houston, Texas, through El Paso on my way to California.
I was following my dream, journeying with the sun.
I was a high school dropout with learning disabilities and was set on surfing the biggest waves in the world, first in California and then in Hawaii, where I would later live.
Upon reaching downtown El Paso, I met an old man, a bum, on the street corner.
He saw me walking, stopped me and questioned me as I passed by.
He asked me if I was running away from home, I suppose because I looked so young.
I told him, "Not exactly, sir.
Since my father had given me a ride to the freeway in Houston and given me his blessings while saying, 'It is important to follow your dream and what is in your heart, son.' "
The bum then asked me if he could buy me a cup of coffee.
I told him, "No, sir, but a soda would be great. "
We walked to a corner malt shop and sat down on a couple of swiveling stools while we enjoyed our drinks.
After conversing for a few minutes, the friendly bum told me to follow him.
He told me that he had something grand to show me and share with me.
We walked a couple of blocks until we came upon the downtown El Paso Public Library.
We walked up its front steps and stopped at a small information stand.
Here the bum spoke to a smiling old lady, and asked her if she would be kind enough to watch my things for a moment while he and I entered the library.
I left my belongings with this grandmotherly figure and entered into this magnificent hall of learning.
The bum first led me to a table and asked me to sit down and wait for a moment while he looked for something special amongst the shelves.
A few moments later, he returned with a couple of old books under his arms and set them on the table.
He then sat down beside me and spoke.
He started with a few statements that were very special and that changed my life.
He said, "There are two things that I want to teach you, young man, and they are these: Number one is never to judge a book by its cover, for a cover can fool you."
He followed with, "I'll bet you think I'm a bum, don't you, young man? "
I said, "Well, uh, yes, I guess so, sir. "
" Well, young man, I've got a little surprise for you.
I am one of the wealthiest men in the world.
I have probably everything any man could ever want.
I originally come from the Northeast and have all the things that money can buy.
But a year ago, my wife passed away, and since then I have been deeply reflecting upon life.
I realized there were certain things I had not yet experienced in life, one of which was what it would be like to live like a bum on the streets.
I made a commitment to myself to do exactly that for one year.
For the past year I have been going from city to city doing just that.
So, you see, don't ever judge a book by its cover, for a cover can fool you.
" Number two is to learn how to read, my boy.
For there is only one thing that people can't take away from you, and that is your wisdom. "
At that moment, he reached forward, grabbed my right hand in his and put them upon the books he'd pulled from the shelves.
They were the writings of Plato and Aristotle–immortal classics from ancient times.
The bum then led me back past the smiling old woman near the entrance, down the steps and back on the streets near where we first met.
His parting request for me was to never forget what he taught me.
I haven't.
It had been one of those days, hectic, and not very productive.
Her job could at times be very much of a bore.
She liked what she did well enough but it really graded on her nerves sometimes.
It was no real surprise to her when she found out how glad she was to see quitting time come.
She left the office, made her way to the employee parking lot and retrieved her car.
The traffic was as usual horrendous at that time of a day and it would be the middle of summer and the car's air conditioner was out of order.
She rolled the windows down and let the occasional, hot breathed breeze come her way.
What to eat for supper?
She was in no mood to cook or for that matter to go out.
Her husband was already at home so why not have him call out for pizza!
She picked up the cell phone and dialed her home number.
It seemed to ring forever.
Finally, her husband answered but his voice was filled with agitation.
It had become an all too familiar sound as of late.
Such was life after so many years of marriage!
He reluctantly agreed to order the pizza if she would stop and get the beer.
It meant a detour off the freeway but fair was fair…, besides there was a convenience store on that way home.
Errands completed, she arrived at the small frame house and noticed none too happily that her flowers were wilting in the heat.
What was wrong with the sprinkler system now?
She carried the bag of groceries in the house and found him sitting in the kitchen.
He looked aggravated and upset.
She did not have to ask why as the old truck he had seemed to be giving him problems all the time now.
He did not want to go into the expense of buying a new one… But then, which was worse; constant repairs or monthly payments?
It seemed all too often a familiar routine with them both, constantly arguing and always at odds with each other.
What had happened to the romance and the tenderness and the love?
They ate in silence and said little or nothing.
For two people who had once had so much to say they were lost to have a civil conversation.
He went back to work on the truck and she went out to water the garden after cleaning up the kitchen.
There is an azalea bush.
No blooms this year and the leaves falling off.
She had tried everything but nothing seemed to work.
Perhaps it would be best just to dig it up and replant a new one.
She continued the garden watering and then with a resigned sigh, she returned to the house as the last rays of a fading summer sun ended across the horizon.
The next day was the same as before, and on it went for another week or more.
She kept working with the bush but nothing seemed to help.
It was dying.
She made an offhanded remark to him and he just looked at her quietly with a veiled look about his face.
The next day upon returning from work, she looked at her garden once more and noticed that something really seemed out of place.
She was very surprised to find that the old azalea bush had been dug out and next to it was a branch new one, just planted.
She smiled softly to herself and said a silent "thank you".
Sometimes, love does not always speak, but shows up in the strangest of ways!
A daughter complained to her father about her life and how things were so hard for her.
She did not know how she was going to make it and wanted to give up.
She was tired of fighting and struggling.
It seemed as one problem was solved a new one arose.
Her father, a cook, took her to the kitchen.
He filled three pots with water and placed each on a high fire.
Soon the pots came to a boil.
In one he placed carrots, in the second he placed eggs, and in the last he placed ground coffee beans.
He let them sit and boil, without saying a word.
The daughter sucked her teeth and impatiently waited, wondering what he was doing.
In about twenty minutes he turned off the burners.
He fished the carrots out and placed them in a bowl.
He pulled the eggs out and placed them a bowl.
Then he ladled the coffee out and placed it in a mug.
Turning to her he asked, "Darling, what do you see? "
"Carrots, eggs, and coffee," she replied.
He brought her closer and asked her to feel the carrots.
She did and noted that they were soft.
He then asked her to take an egg and break it.
After pulling off the shell, she observed the hard-boiled egg.
Finally, he asked her to sip the coffee.
She smiled, as she tasted its rich aroma.
" What does it mean, Father? "
she humbly asked.
He explained that each of them had faced the same adversity, boiling water, but each reacted differently.
The carrot went in strong, hard, and unrelenting.
But after being subjected to the boiling water, it softened and became weak.
The egg had been fragile.
Its thin outer shell had protected its liquid interior.
But after sitting through the boiling water, its inside became hardened.
The ground coffee beans were unique, however.
After they were in the boiling water, they had changed the water.
" Which are you? "
he asked his daughter.
When adversity knocks on your door, how do you respond?
Are you a carrot, an egg, or a coffee bean?
Plunk!
I dropped another plump pecan into my bucket.
Then a cool autumn breeze shook a few more nuts loose from the tree and I scrambled to pick them up from the ground.
Whew!
Pecan picking was really hard work, I thought, and my bucket was barely half full.
I was six years old, visiting my grandfather's farm in Kansas, and Grandpa had sent me into the woods to gather pecans for us to enjoy later.
The pecans were about the size of a man's thumbnail and just about the tastiest snack I'd ever had.
I wasn't about to let him down.
Just then something caught my eye: A large brown squirrel was digging at the dirt a few feet away.
I watched in amazement as he picked up a pecan in his jaws and scurried toward a tree.
The industrious squirrel scampered up the trunk and disappeared into a large hole.
A moment later the squirrel popped back out and climbed down to the ground to pick up another nut.
Once again, he took the pecan back to his secret hiding place inside the hollow of the tree.
Not so secret anymore, I thought.
I dashed over to the tree and peered into the hollow.
It was stuffed with pecans!
Golden brown morsels of goodness right there for the taking.
This was my chance.
Handful by handful, I scooped all of those pecans into my little bucket.
Now it was almost full!
I was so proud of myself.
I couldn't wait to show Grandpa all of the pecans I'd collected.
I quickly ran back and found him sitting outside on the steps of the corncrib, shelling a cob of corn to feed to the hens.
"Look, Grandpa," I shouted, "look at all of the pecans I found! "
He gazed into the bucket. "
Well, well, how did you ever find so many? "
I told him how I'd followed the squirrel and taken the pecans from his hiding place in the hollow tree.
I was beaming when I finished my tale.
Grandpa congratulated me on how resourceful I'd been in observing the squirrel and his habits.
Then he did something that surprised me.
He handed the bucket back to me and wrapped his arm gently around my shoulders.
" That squirrel worked very hard to gather his winter supply of food," he said. "
Now that all of his pecans are gone, don't you think that little squirrel will be mighty hungry when it gets cold? "
" I didn't think about that," I said.
" I know," Grandpa said. "
But a good man should never take advantage of someone else's hard work, even the squirrels. "
Suddenly I felt as hollow as that old tree.
The image of that starving squirrel wouldn't leave my mind.
There was only one thing I could do.
I picked up that little bucket full of pecans and carried it back to the tree.
Lifting the bucket up, I poured all of the nuts back into the hole, refilling it with all of the squirrel's pecans - and the ones I had collected on my own.
I didn't eat any of the sweet pecans that night, but I had something much more filling.
The satisfaction of knowing I had done just the right thing.
Are you happy with your life?
Are you feeling in control?
If not, wake up and take charge!
Learn to be independent.
Learn to manage your life.
Change now, your chance is here!
Go after what you want!
Get what you deserve!
Here's how to be your own master.
First, find your niche in this world.
Find your one true passion.
Figure out what you want to be.
Then create your destiny.
Make that future your target.
Make that your mission in life.
Dream big dreams.
Nothing is impossible.
Set goals, and then start climbing higher.
Second, decide to be an expert.
Become a leader in your field.
Master your chosen profession.
Learn from role models.
Learn from setbacks.
Learn as much as you can.
Make a name for yourself.
Create a demand for yourself.
That's the way to be a winner.
Third, do whatever it takes, give it all you've got.
Let nothing stand in your way.
Play the game "full out. "
Play like there is no tomorrow.
Be relentless in pursuit of your goals.
Be committed.
Be willing to sacrifice!
Soon, you'll be in control.
Finally, never rest on your laurels.
Keep learning and growing.
Keep improving and moving to the top.
Always want to do more.
Always want to be better.
Strive to maximize your potential.
Seek challenges.
Seize opportunities.
Don't relax, compromise, or quit.
In conclusion, your life is up to you.
You call the shots.
You choose the road you take.
Choose to be free.
Be in the driver's seat.
Be the captain of your ship.
That's how to be happy.
That's the secret to success.
Change now and be your own master.
We cannot travel every path.
Success must be won along one line.
We must make our business the one life purpose to which every other must be subordinate.
I hate a thing done by halves.
If it be right, do it boldly.
If it be wrong, leave it undone.
The men of history were not perpetually looking into the mirror to make sure of their own size.
Absorbed in their work they did it.
They did it so well that the wondering world sees them to be great, and labeled them accordingly.
To live with a high ideal is a successful life.
It is not what one does, but what one tries to do, that makes a man strong. "
Eternal vigilance," it has been said, "is the price of liberty. "
With equal truth it may be said, "Unceasing effort is the price of success. "
If we do not work with our might, others will; and they will outstrip us in the race, and pluck the prize from our grasp.
Success grows less and less dependent on luck and chance.
Self-distrust is the cause of most of our failures.
The great and indispensable help to success is character.
Character is a crystallized habit, the result of training and conviction.
Every character is influenced by heredity, environment and education.
But these apart, if every man were not to be a great extent the architect of his own character, he would be a fatalist, and irresponsible creature of circumstances.
Instead of saying that man is a creature of circumstance, it would be nearer the mark to say that man is the architect of circumstance.
From the same materials one man builds palaces, another hovel.
Bricks and mortar are mortar and bricks, until the architect can make them something else.
The true way to gain much is never to desire to gain too much.
Wise men don't care for what they can't have.
We touch the lives of others in ways we often never know.
People sometimes come into our personal world for fleeting moments and can leave us forever changed.
We have more power to create or to destroy than we can imagine.
We can leave things or individuals better or worse than we found them.
A look, a word, a gesture has tremendous impact and frequently we blither along through our existence unaware of the mighty power that our communication wields.
Here's an example:
It was a rainy, humid day: the mother of all bad hair days.
I was riding on a bus downtown to go to work.
The windows on the bus were covered in condensation so thick you couldn't look outside.
Everyone was wilting.
I was sitting next to a man in a business suit and didn't pay much attention until we both got off at the same stop and walked to the same newsstand to get a morning paper.
The man running the stand was obviously having a bad day.
He was rude, abrupt and unsmiling as we purchased our papers, which served to only add more gloom to my day.
The businessman caught my eye and smiled.
He then proceeded to smile brightly, thank the newsstand proprietor for the paper and for being open on such a morning to make sure we were able to get our papers.
In short, he expressed his appreciation for something most of us would take for granted.
The man running the newsstand responded only with a grunt and a sour expression.
The businessman then pleasantly wished him a pleasant day.
As we turned away, I asked this man why he had continued to be pleasant to the newsman when he obviously didn't care about and didn't respond to his expression of appreciation and friendliness.
The businessman grinned at me and said, "Why would I let someone else control what I say and what I feel or what kind of day I'm going to have? "
We then separated to go to our respective work places.
To this day, I don't know who that businessman was, where he worked, or anything else about him.
I never saw him again, even though I looked for him on the bus on other days.
He appeared briefly in my life and disappeared just as quickly.
I don't even remember what he looked like.
But l've never forgotten the words he said or the way his smile seemed like a shaft of light on a gloomy day.
That was a good 25 years ago, but the impact this had on my life has lasted.
I never had a chance to thank him personally, but the way in which I try to choose to look at life as a result of those words is his legacy to me and my thanks to him.
Our interactions with the people we encounter can impact at least the next five people that person encounters.
A smile and words of simple appreciation multiply themselves geometrically.
We cannot control people and situations that come to us, but we can always control our response to them.
And it's something everyone can do.
It is a real legacy that can impact both the present and the future.
President Bok, former President Rudenstine, incoming President Faust, members of the Harvard Corporation and the Board of Overseers, members of the faculty, parents, and especially, the graduates:
I've been waiting more than 30 years to say this: "Dad, I always told you I'd come back and get my degree. "
I want to thank Harvard for this timely honor.
I'll be changing my job next year … and it will be nice to finally have a college degree on my resume.
I applaud the graduates today for taking a much more direct route to your degrees.
For my part, I'm just happy that the Crimson has called me "Harvard's most successful dropout. "
I guess that makes me valedictorian of my own special class… I did the best of everyone who failed.
But I also want to be recognized as the guy who got Steve Ballmer to drop out of business school.
I'm a bad influence.
That's why I was invited to speak at your graduation.
If I had spoken at your orientation, fewer of you might be here today.
Harvard was just a phenomenal experience for me.
Academic life was fascinating.
I used to sit in on lots of classes I hadn't even signed up for.
And dorm life was terrific.
I lived up at Radcliffe, in Currier House.
There were always lots of people in my dorm room late at night discussing things, because everyone knew I didn't worry about getting up in the morning.
That's how I came to be the leader of the anti-social group.
We clung to each other as a way of validating our rejection of all those social people.
Radcliffe was a great place to live.
There were more women up there, and most of the guys were science-math types.
That combination offered me the best odds, if you know what I mean.
This is where I learned the sad lesson that improving your odds doesn't guarantee success.
One of my biggest memories of Harvard came in January 1975, when I made a call from Currier House to a company in Albuquerque that had begun making the world's first personal computers.
I offered to sell them software.
I worried that they would realize I was just a student in a dorm and hang up on me.
Instead they said: "We're not quite ready, come see us in a month," which was a good thing, because we hadn't written the software yet.
From that moment, I worked day and night on this little extra credit project that marked the end of my college education and the beginning of a remarkable journey with Microsoft.
What I remember above all about Harvard was being in the midst of so much energy and intelligence.
It could be exhilarating, intimidating, sometimes even discouraging, but always challenging.
It was an amazing privilege - and though I left early, I was transformed by my years at Harvard, the friendships I made, and the ideas I worked on.
…
Members of the Harvard Family: Here in the Yard is one of the great collections of intellectual talent in the world.
What for?
There is no question that the faculty, the alumni, the students, and the benefactors of Harvard have used their power to improve the lives of people here and around the world.
But can we do more?
Can Harvard dedicate its intellect to improving the lives of people who will never even hear its name?
Let me make a request of the deans and the professors - the intellectual leaders here at Harvard: As you hire new faculty, award tenure, review curriculum, and determine degree requirements, please ask yourselves:
Should our best minds be dedicated to solving our biggest problems?
Should Harvard encourage its faculty to take on the world's worst inequities?
Should Harvard students learn about the depth of global poverty: the prevalence of world hunger, the scarcity of clean water, the girls kept out of school, the children who die from diseases we can cure?
Should the world's most privileged people learn about the lives of the world's least privileged?
These are not rhetorical questions - you will answer with your policies.
My mother, who was filled with pride the day I was admitted here - never stopped pressing me to do more for others.
A few days before my wedding, she hosted a bridal event, at which she read aloud a letter about marriage that she had written to Melinda.
My mother was very ill with cancer at the time, but she saw one more opportunity to deliver her message, and at the close of the letter she said: "From those to whom much is given, much is expected. "
When you consider what those of us here in this Yard have been given - in talent, privilege, and opportunity - there is almost no limit to what the world has a right to expect from us.
In line with the promise of this age, I want to exhort each of the graduates here to take on an issue - a complex problem, a deep inequity, and become a specialist on it.
If you make it the focus of your career, that would be phenomenal.
But you don't have to do that to make an impact.
For a few hours every week, you can use the growing power of the Internet to get informed, find others with the same interests, see the barriers, and find ways to cut through them.
Don't let complexity stop you.
Be activists.
Take on the big inequities.
It will be one of the great experiences of your lives.
You graduates are coming of age in an amazing time.
As you leave Harvard, you have technology that members of my class never had.
You have awareness of global inequity, which we did not have.
And with that awareness, you likely also have an informed conscience that will torment you if you abandon these people whose lives you could change with very little effort.
You have more than we had; you must start sooner, and carry on longer.
Knowing what you know, how could you not?
And I hope you will come back here to Harvard 30 years from now and reflect on what you have done with your talent and your energy.
I hope you will judge yourselves not on your professional accomplishments alone, but also on how well you have addressed the world's deepest inequities, on how well you treated people a world away who have nothing in common with you but their humanity.
Good luck.
A great life doesn't happen by accident.
A great life is the result of allocating your time, energy, thoughts, and hard work towards what you want your life to be.
Stop setting yourself up for stress and failure, and start setting up your life to support success and ease.
A great life is the result of using the 24/7 you get in a creative and thoughtful way, instead of just what comes next.
Customize these "secrets" to fit your own needs and style, and start creating your own great life today!
1.
S－Simplify.
A great life is the result of simplifying your life.
People often misinterpret what simplify means.
It's not a way to remove work from your life.
When you focus on simplifying your life, you free up energy and time for the work that you enjoy and the purpose for which you are here.
In order to create a great life, you will have to make room for it in yours first.
2.
E－Effort.
A great life is the result of your best effort.
Creating a great life requires that you make some adjustments.
It may mean reevaluating how you spend your time, or choosing to spend your money in a different way.
It may mean looking for new ways to spend your energy that coincide with your particular definition of a great life.
Life will reward your best effort.
3.
C－Create Priorities.
A great life is the result of creating priorities.
It's easy to spend your days just responding to the next thing that gets your attention, instead of intentionally using the time, energy and money you have in a way that's important to you.
Focus on removing the obstacles that get in the way of you making sure you are honoring your priorities.
4.
R–Reserves.
A great life is the result of having reserves - reserves of things, time, space, energy, money.
With reserves, you acquire far more than you need - not 6 months living expenses, but 5 years worth; not 15 minutes of free time, 1 day.
Reserves are important because they reduce the fear of consequences, and that allows you to make decisions based on what you really want instead of what the fear decides for you.
5.
E－Eliminate distractions.
A great life is the result of eliminating distractions.
Up to 75% of your mental energy can be tied up in things that are draining and distracting you.
Eliminating distractions can be a difficult concept to many people, since they haven't really considered that there is another way to live.
Look around at someone's life you admire.
What do they do that you would like to incorporate into your own life?
Ask them how they did it.
Find ways to free up your mental energy for things that are more important to you.
6.
T－Thoughts.
A great life is the result of controlling your thoughts so that you accept and allow for the possibility that it actually can happen to you!
Your belief in the outcome will directly dictate how successful you are.
Motivated people have specific goals and look for ways to achieve them.
Believing there is a solution to the same old problems you encounter year after year is vitally important to creating a life that you love.
7.
S－Start.
A great life is the result of starting.
There's the old saying everyone's familiar with "a journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step. "
In order to even move from the couch to the refrigerator, you have to start.
There's no better time to start than today.
Don't wait for a raise, or until the kids get older, or the weather is better.
Today, right now, is the right day to start to take a step in the direction of your heart's desires.
It's what you do TODAY that will make a difference in your life tomorrow.
What happened to that brilliant idea that you once had?
Did you ignore it because you thought that it was just a little thought?
Have you ever considered what that little thought would have become if you had acted on your instincts or if you had paid more attention to it?
Imagine a scenario, where you are sitting at home watching television or reading a book, suddenly a light bulb is turned on in the dark tunnel of your mind as a thought or an idea crosses your mind.
The thought catches your attention but seems so meaningless and you are tempted to discard it, but wait a minute!
That thought could be the potential beginning of the success you have so much yearned for.
As the thought crosses your mind, your senses become alert and you suddenly see a possibility, a realization, a solution, a conclusion, or find the answer to a problem whose solution has long eluded you.
It is almost as if a divine being has whispered the perfect solution into your ear or awakened your senses to a reality thereby bringing illumination to your life.
It is like finding the last piece of a jigsaw puzzle.
This becomes an AHA moment and everything freezes around you as you excitedly try to grasp the practicality of that little but powerful thought.
Your self-confidence and enthusiasm increase as you become conscious of the great possibilities that can arise if that little thought is acted upon.
This becomes the moment to build upon that thought and to write down any ideas that are streaming from that little thought for later review.
Seemingly meaningless little thoughts or ideas when acted upon have a potential to explode into great projects.
Many successful projects have been born from the little positive thoughts that were carefully nurtured and recognized as tickets to great things.
You may have heard people say many times that it just came to me in a flash.
In a flash moment, a small idea or seemingly meaningless thought may cross your mind about something you have been planning to accomplish.
Don't waste an opportunity to act on a potentially brilliant idea.
You don't have to wait for a major idea, a master strategy, or approval from your peers in order for you to act on that little thought.
That little thought or idea is the beginning of great things if you decide to follow it through.
When I was eight or nine years old, I wrote my first poem.
At that time my father was head of Paramount Studios.
My mother was involved in various intellectual projects.
My mother read the little poem and began to cry, "Buddy, you didn't really write this beautiful, beautiful poem! "
I stammered that I did.
My mother poured out her praise.
Why, this poem was nothing short of genius!
I glowed. "
What time will Father be home? "
I asked.
I could hardly wait to show him.
I spent the best part of that afternoon preparing for his arrival.
First, I wrote the poem out in my finest flourish.
Then I crayoned an elaborate border around it.
As seven o'clock drew near, I confidently placed it on my father's plate on the dining-room table.
But my father did not return at seven.
I could hardly stand the suspense.
I admired my father.
He had begun his motion picture career as a writer.
He would be able to appreciate this wonderful poem of mine even more than my mother.
That evening when my father burst in, his mood seemed thunderous.
An hour late for dinner, he could not sit down but circled the long dining room table with a drink in his hand, calling down terrible oaths on his employees.
He wheeled in his pacing, paused and glared at his plate.
There was a suspenseful silence. "
What is this? "
He was reaching for my poem.
" Ben, a wonderful thing has happened," my mother began, "Buddy has written his first poem!
And it's beautiful, absolutely amazing…"
" If you don't mind, I'd like to decide for myself," father said.
I kept my face lowered to my plate as he read that poem.
It was only ten lines.
But it seemed to take hours.
I remember wondering why it was taking so long.
I could hear my father breathing.
Then I could hear him dropping the poem back on the table.
Now came the moment of decision.
" I think it's lousy," he said.
I couldn't look up.
My eyes were getting wet.
" Ben, sometimes I don't understand you," my mother said. "
This is just a little boy.
These are the first lines of poetry he's ever written.
He needs encouragement. "
" I don't know why," My father held his ground,"Isn't there enough lousy poetry in the world already?
No law says Buddy has to become a poet. "
They quarreled over it.
I couldn't stand it another second.
I ran from the dining room up to my room, threw myself on the bed and sobbed.
That may have been the end of the anecdote, but not of its significance for me.
A few years later I took a second look at that first poem; it was a pretty lousy poem.
After a while, I worked up the courage, to show him something new, a short story.
My father thought it was overwritten but not hopeless.
I was learning to rewrite.
And my mother was learning that she could criticize me without crushing me.
You might say we were all learning.
I was going on 12.
But it wasn't until years later that the true meaning of that painful "first poem" experience dawned on me.
As it became clearer and clearer to me how fortunate I had been.
I had a mother who said, "Buddy, did you really write this?
I think it's wonderful!"
and a father who shook his head no and drove me to tears with, "I think it's lousy. "
A writer - in fact every one of us in life - needs that loving force from which all creation flows.
Yet alone that force is incomplete, even misleading, balance of the force that cautions, "Watch.
Listen.
Review.
Improve. "
Sometimes you find these opposing forces in associates, friends, loved ones.
But finally you must balance these opposites within yourself: first, the confidence to go forward, to do, to become; second, the tempering of self-approval with hardheaded, realistic self-appraisal.
Those conflicting but complementary voices of my childhood echo down through the years - wonderful… lousy… wonderful… lousy - like two opposing winds battering me.
I try to navigate my craft so as not to capsize before either.
Dale Carnegie says, "any fool can criticize, condemn, and complain but it takes character and self-control to be understanding and forgiving. "
We can claim to be proactive in our life by setting goals and going after what we want.
But if we're always whining and complaining, are we really living effectively?
If you don't believe me, count how many times you complain about something or other in one day.
Whether it be being stuck in traffic, being bothered by the weather, not enough mustard on your sandwich, or whatever it is, there are endless instances where you can find a reason to complain.
But it's not just outside circumstances that we complain about.
We complain about ourselves too.
We complain that we don't have enough time, we don't have enough money, that we're not smart enough, cool enough, or just enough.
I know I've experienced plenty of unpleasantness due to complaining about things I can't control.
I never really thought about it much until I found this website about "living in a complaint-free world. "
Imagine how much happier you would be if you simply stopped complaining?
Much of what you complain about is outside of your control anyway.
What's the point of brooding about something you have no power to change?
Not very intelligent, if you ask me.
Simply becoming conscious of how much you complain is the first step to stopping.
When you recognize that you're complaining, stop and take notice of it.
Ask yourself if you would rather complain, or be happy.
Are you ready to live a complaint-free, happier life?
They are the principles on which my wife and I have tried to bring up our family.
They are the principles in which my father believed and by which he governed his life.
They are the principles, many of them, which I learned at my mother's knee.
They point the way to usefulness and happiness in life, to courage and peace in death.
If they mean to you what they mean to me, they may perhaps be helpful also to our sons for their guidance and inspiration.
Let me state them:
I believe in the supreme worth of the individual and in his right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
I believe that every right implies a responsibility; every opportunity, an obligation; every possession, a duty.
I believe that the law was made for man and not man for the law; that government is the servant of the people and not their master.
I believe in the dignity of labor, whether with head or hand; that the world owes no man a living but that it owes every man an opportunity to make a living.
I believe that thrift is essential to well-ordered living and that economy is a prime requisite of a sound financial structure, whether in government, business or personal affairs.
I believe that truth and justice are fundamental to an enduring social order.
I believe in the sacredness of a promise, that a man's word should be as good as his bond, that character - not wealth or power or position - is of supreme worth.
I believe that the rendering of useful service is the common duty of mankind and that only in the purifying fire of sacrifice is the dross of selfishness consumed and the greatness of the human soul set free.
I believe that love is the greatest thing in the world; that it alone can overcome hate; that right can and will triumph over might.
These are the principles, however formulated, for which all good men and women throughout the world, irrespective of race or creed, education, social position or occupation, are standing, and for which many of them are suffering and dying.
These are the principles upon which alone a new world recognizing the brotherhood of man can be established.