What Is a Hurricane?
A hurricane is a furious, spiraling tropical storm system that can smash buildings apart and hurl trees, cars, and massive chunks of debris far into the air.
Wind speeds in a hurricane can reach more than 150 miles (250 kilometers) per hour.
The wind brings with it torrential rain and thunderstorms.
A hurricane roars in from the ocean and lashes the coast for hours, causing terrible damage, but dies down quite quickly as it moves farther inland.
Angry gods and “big winds”
Tropical storm systems in the Americas are called hurricanes, but they are known by different names around the world.
People in the Americas call them hurricanes after the ancient Mayan and Taino god of wind, storms, and destruction, Hurakan or Jurakan.
In southeast Asia, where tropical storms come from the Pacific, people call them typhoons, from the Japanese tai foon, meaning “great wind.”
In India and Australia tropical storms are called cyclones.
 ▲ Sand whips through a parking lot in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, as Hurricane Katrina (2005) hits the United States.
A tropical storm can be officially classed as a hurricane, typhoon or cyclone if it has winds that blow faster than 74 miles (118 kilometers) per hour.
Hurricanes in history
Hurricanes, cyclones, and typhoons have always happened, but because many strike areas where people did not keep written records, we do not have detailed accounts of them going back very far in time.
As soon as Europeans began to visit South and Central America, they encountered hurricanes.
Christopher Columbus’s ship sheltered from a hurricane in a bay in 1502, but 20 other ships were sunk by the storm on their way back to Spain.
 ▲ A hurricane and resulting sea flood in Galveston, Texas, in 1900 destroyed the town and killed around 8,000 people.
CASE STUDY
The Great Hurricane, 1780
Three hurricanes struck the West Indies in 1780, the worst of which killed 22,000 people over eight days, making it the deadliest hurricane ever to strike the Western Hemisphere.
It destroyed nearly every building in Barbados, flattened St. Lucia, demolished St. Pierre, the capital of Martinique, and on St. Vincent it sent a storm surge 19.8 feet (six meters) high that washed villages out to sea.
Most of the British fleet at St. Lucia was sunk, as well as 15 Dutch ships in Grenada.
It would be 200 years before another hurricane would claim more than 10,000 lives in the Atlantic.
Where Hurricanes Happen
Tropical storms occur in tropical regions of the Atlantic, Indian, and Pacific oceans.
The water temperature must be at least 79.7 °F (26.5 °C) for the storm to be able to gather enough strength to be classed as a hurricane.
Most Atlantic hurricanes form off the west coast of Africa, then drift westward to reach land in Central America and the Caribbean.
Landfall
When a hurricane, cyclone, or typhoon reaches land, it wreaks destruction along the coast and continues its path inland.
After hitting land the storm rapidly loses power since it is no longer heated from beneath by tropical seas.
Within 12 hours most of the force has been spent - although it can travel as far as 175 miles (280 kilometers) inland before dying out.
▲ The people of Chockwe, Mozambique, depend on rainstorms - but floods are still disruptive.
Storm zones
The most destructive hurricanes strike the southeast coast of the United States, Central America, and the Caribbean.
Typhoons plague the coasts around the Indian Ocean and many parts of the Pacific Ocean.
In the Indian Ocean, they most often strike Indonesia, India, Sri Lanka, and Thailand but also hit Madagascar and east Africa.
In the Pacific they are most common around Japan, eastern China, and the Philippines but can also strike the west coast of Australia and New Guinea.
Their impact is greatest in areas where most people live.
The Caroline and Marianas island chains and the north coast of Luzon Island in the Philippines have the largest number of tropical storms anywhere in the world, with around 10 each year.
Mozambique in Africa depends on the rain brought by tropical storms to boost its water supplies, but the country frequently floods as a result of these typhoons.
▲ Jupiter’s red spot - a giant, ancient storm system.
GREATEST STORM IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM
The planet Jupiter has a large red spot, which is actually a massive storm system.
Like a hurricane, it consists of winds whirling in a circle at great speeds - around 425 miles (680 kilometers) per hour.
Jupiter is a gas giant - a planet made entirely of gas - so the storm will never drift over land and die down.
The storm has been raging for at least 180 years.
The storm is 10,250 miles (16,500 kilometers) across, covering about the same area as half of the Earth’s surface.
How Hurricanes Happen
A tropical storm builds up over the sea where equatorial winds from different directions meet.
The warm air spirals upward, taking heat and moisture from the sea and growing increasingly strong.
Drawing power from the sea
An Atlantic hurricane begins as a thunderstorm off the west coast of Africa and then becomes a tropical depression.
This is a system of swirling clouds and rain, with winds of less than 37.2 miles (62 kilometers) per hour.
Warm air, carrying evaporated water, rises from the surface of the sea.
The air cools as it rises, and the water vapor condenses to form rain clouds, which add to the growing storm.
Heat escapes from the condensing water and warms the air higher up, which rises in turn, setting up a cycle of warm air being sucked up from the ocean, losing its water to storm clouds, and warming more air.
The rising column pulls ever more warm air and water from the surface of the sea.
 ▲ A satellite image of tropical depression Rita (2005) forming over the Bahamas in the Caribbean.
Colliding winds
Winds from different directions collide and circle around the column of rising air and moisture, setting up a circular wind pattern.
Much higher up, a stronger wind blowing in a single direction carries the warm air away, pulling up yet more air.
High air pressure above the storm helps to suck in more air at the bottom where the air pressure is low.
The wind speed increases, first to tropical storm strength (39-73 miles or 62.4–116.8 kilometers per hour) and finally to hurricane force - 74 miles (118 kilometers) per hour or above.
▲ A tornado destroys a house in Texas, in 2004 - a year with a record number of tornadoes.
TORNADOES
Tornadoes are small, rapidly circling whirlwinds.
They may travel ahead of hurricanes or behind them, but they can also occur on their own, inland.
A tornado forms beneath a storm cloud, when air is sucked up into the storm cloud from the ground.
Sometimes up to 1.2 miles (two kilometers) wide, a tornado can travel at 33 miles (55 kilometers) per hour and have winds of up to 150 miles (250 kilometers) per hour.
Rising warm air sucks in more air from beneath the tornado in the same way as happens in a hurricane.
A tornado can appear to jump if its vortex (whirling center) is disturbed - the tornado stops briefly but often re-forms in a slightly different place.
Anatomy of a Hurricane
Hurricanes have a very clear structure, and all hurricanes share the same characteristics.
Parts of a hurricane
The destructive part of a hurricane is the whirling band of wind and rainstorms.
In the center of the storm is a still area with very low air pressure called the eye.
A thick bank of cloud and rain just around the eye is called the eyewall.
The eyewall contains the strongest winds and rains.
Outside the eyewall there may be a moat - an area of reduced rain.
A thin veil of very high cloud over the top of the hurricane system, made of tiny ice crystals, is called the veil of cirrus.
The hurricane can extend 10.8 miles (18 kilometers) upward.
Widths vary, but a large hurricane can be 288 miles (480 kilometers) wide.
Some large typhoons have measured 1,380 miles (2,220 kilometers) across.
 ▲ The eyewall of Hurricane Katrina (2005), seen from within the hurricane.
Under pressure
A hurricane is a low-pressure system.
The air at the center of the storm is at very low pressure.
Because the air pressure is so low, warm air and water are drawn up into the hurricane, continually feeding it.
Saffir-Simpson hurricane scale
The scale used for reporting the size of hurricanes is based on the wind speed.
Hurricanes with very strong winds cause terrible damage.
Category
Wind speeds
Damage 74-95 miles (119-153 kilometers) per hour
Little damage to buildings; coastal flooding 96-110 miles ( 154-177 kilometers) per hour
Damage to roofs, doors, and windows; flood damage to piers; some trees blown down 111-129 miles (178-208 kilometers) per hour
Structural damage to small buildings; large trees blown down; coastal and inland flooding; flood damage to small structures 130-156 miles (209-251 kilometers) per hour
Roofs lost from small buildings; serious erosion of beach areas; inland flooding
Over 157 miles (252 kilometers) per hour
Roofs lost from all buildings; some buildings destroyed or blown away; serious flood damage to all structures near the coast
HURRICANE WINDS
Storms whip around in a hurricane at speeds of 74 to 157 miles (119 to 252 kilometers) per hour, or even 192 miles (320 kilometers) per hour in a very severe Pacific typhoon.
Hurricane Gustav (2008) had the fastest winds recorded in an Atlantic hurricane at 211 miles (340 kilometers) per hour.
The winds in a hurricane circle counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere.
This is because of the effect of the spinning of the earth on the movement of the wind and cloud.
The movement of the earth appears counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere.
Predictable Buildup
Hurricanes are part of the normal weather patterns that happen around the world each year.
In the Atlantic the hurricane season lasts from June 1 to November 30.
Wind and water
Every year hot and cold winds blow at certain times and in certain places as part of the global weather pattern.
There are also regular patterns to the temperatures of the sea in different areas.
Hurricanes happen when certain patterns of wind and sea temperature occur at the same time.
 ▲ Violent seas batter the shore in Jamaica as Hurricane Gilbert (1988) makes landfall.
Meteorologists (people who study the weather) track wind speeds and study satellite photographs of weather systems to help them spot when a hurricane is brewing.
They use computer modeling techniques to predict the likely path of a growing hurricane.
Helping people to safety
When a hurricane is expected, governments can warn people to take shelter or move to a safe area.
Because weather systems are immensely complex and can change quickly, predictions are not always accurate.
Scientists can only predict the wind speeds that will occur on land just before the hurricane hits the coast.
Sometimes, it is difficult for governments to decide whether to risk evacuating people needlessly or to leave them where they may be in danger.
Evacuation can lead to road traffic accidents, and unnecessary evacuations can make people less likely to take notice of similar warnings in the future.
 ▲ Traffic blocks the highway as people try to escape the path of Hurricane Floyd in Georgia (1999).
HURRICANE NAMES
Since 1953, hurricanes have been given human names.
There are different sets of names in use around the world.
For Atlantic hurricanes, a set of 21 names, each starting with a different letter of the alphabet, is available for use each year.
As a hurricane is announced, it is given the next free name.
If all the names are used up - if there are more than 21 hurricanes in a year - letters of the Greek alphabet are used as names instead.
Six lists of names are used in rotation.
If a hurricane is particularly bad or causes many deaths, its name is retired and replaced by a new name.
There is a table of names for hurricanes from 2006–2010 on page 30.
Wild Winds and Water
Although a hurricane causes the most damage to people once it hits land, its effects out at sea can be devastating to shipping.
When it strikes the coast, the accompanying rain, flooding, and raging tides can sometimes cause more damage than the winds themselves.
Out at sea
All hurricanes start out at sea, and some travel thousands of miles before reaching land.
They can sink large and small boats, and it is difficult to use either rescue boats or helicopters to help shipwrecked sailors during a hurricane.
As a hurricane approaches land, it pushes a huge storm surge - a large wave of water - ahead of it.
This floods harbours and beaches and smashes through storm defenses.
 ▲ Pedestrians in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, struggle to walk through storms caused by Hurricane Katrina (2005).
In the air
Hurricanes would obviously be very dangerous to aircraft, but there is usually enough warning for pilots to keep well away from them.
Even so, strong winds hundreds of miles from the hurricane itself can cause rough conditions.
More importantly, high winds can hamper emergency work, and rescue helicopters and planes carrying relief supplies cannot approach the disaster zone until the winds drop.
Super-typhoons
Extra-strong typhoons, more powerful than any Atlantic hurricanes, are called super-typhoons.
With winds well over 150 miles (241 kilometers) per hour and even as much as 215 miles (346 kilometers) per hour, they cause terrible devastation if they hit an inhabited stretch of coast.
The largest ever recorded was Super-typhoon Tip, which formed in the northwest Pacific in 1979.
It was 1,380 miles (2,220 kilometers) across and had wind speeds of up to 190 miles (306 kilometers) per hour, but fortunately it did not strike land.
Increasingly large and powerful hurricanes, which scientists have called hypercanes, are expected in the Atlantic too as global weather conditions change.
 ▲ Fishing boats washed ashore in Bayou La Batre, Mississippi, by Hurricane Katrina (2005).
CASE STUDY
Hakata Bay, 1281
In 1281, a great typhoon destroyed the invasion fleet that the Mongol leader Kublai Kahn had assembled to attack Japan.
It ripped through Hakata Bay in southwest Japan, sinking nearly 2,000 of the fleet of 2,200 and drowning between 45,000 and 65,000 troops.
Riding the Storm
The approach of a hurricane is terrifying for the people who live near the coast.
Even though hurricanes happen every year, each one usually hits a fairly small strip of coast, so most people do not see many large hurricanes.
On the beach
The storm surge is the first part of the hurricane to strike land.
When a storm surge combines with high tide, the effects can be particularly devastating.
Waves can be up to 42.9 feet (13 meters) high, washing over harbors and beachfronts and battering through storm barriers and seawalls.
The waves tear boats from their moorings and smash them against harbor walls or even carry them far inland.
As the wind makes its way over the beach, it whips up the sand into a cloud.
Sometimes the sand can become electrically charged in the storm clouds and glow with static electricity.
 ▲ Store workers board up windows in advance of Hurricane Fran (1996) in North Carolina.
Violent winds
The winds grow in strength, often bringing torrential rain at the same time.
Winds are so strong that they tear up trees, pull the roofs off houses, and even hurl vehicles and small buildings around.
Houses sometimes explode since the pressure inside them is much higher than the pressure outside.
People may be blown over, smashed into objects or picked up by the wind and carried some distance before they are dropped.
After a while the wind calms, and many people think the danger is over.
But this is the eye of the hurricane passing, and the storm soon restarts as violently as before.
People who come out from shelter when the eye passes over them are often caught unawares by the second wind.
 ▲ A house damaged by Hurricane Hugo (1989) in South Carolina.
CASE STUDY
Hurricane Mitch, 1998
Hurricane Mitch ripped through Nicaragua in 1998.
It first hit land as a tropical storm in Florida but gathered strength as it passed over the sea again.
Torrential rains caused flooding and mud slides, killing 11,000 people and making it the most deadly hurricane since the Great Hurricane of 1780.
The flooding was made worse by the slow movement of the hurricane over land - it moved at 4.2 miles (seven kilometers) per hour, which gave plenty of time for rain to fall.
Human Catastrophe
Many people fear the winds of a hurricane, but most deaths are caused by flooding and the aftereffects of the storm.
Immediate dangers
People caught in a hurricane may be whisked up into the air and smashed against trees or buildings or collide with other objects carried by the wind.
They may be trapped in falling buildings, hit by debris carried by the wind, or injured by glass and masonry falling from high-rise buildings.
Hurricanes are often accompanied by floods from the sea, from rivers bursting their banks, and from torrential rain.
Often, more people drown in floods than are killed by the winds.
In some areas, floods can lead to deadly mud slides and landslides that bury people alive.
 ▲ New Orleans as it was before Hurricane Katrina (2005) and then 17 days afterward, with much of the city flooded.
After the storm
Even when the winds die down, the danger is not over.
The land may stay flooded for weeks.
People may have nowhere to shelter from continuing bad weather and no food or clean water.
Injured and sick people are often cut off from medical help.
Survivors may begin to suffer from exposure if the weather is cold, or they may suffer dehydration, sunstroke, or heat exhaustion if it is hot.
In some areas they may be prey to poisonous snakes, dangerous animals, and disease-carrying insects.
In refugee camps and emergency accommodations, people are often crowded together in unsanitary conditions without adequate food, water, or medical attention.
Disease spreads rapidly in such conditions.
After a cyclone in Bangladesh in 1876, which killed 100,000 people, a further 100,000 died in the cholera epidemic that followed it.
 ▲ A couple and their baby escape from their car in the New Orleans floods brought by Hurricane Katrina (2005).
CASE STUDY
Galveston, 1900
The hurricane that hit the island of Galveston, Texas, in September 1900 caused the worst natural disaster in U.S. history.
With winds of up to 135 miles (225 kilometers) per hour and a storm surge of 15.8 feet (4.8 meters), it killed more than 6,000 people and destroyed 3,600 buildings.
With no early warning systems, the people of Galveston did not know the hurricane was coming and were not evacuated.
The destruction was so severe and the conditions so bad that the dead were piled up and burned where they lay.
Helping Out
When a hurricane strikes an inhabited area, help of many kinds is needed immediately.
Often, local emergency services cannot cope with the demand, and national and sometimes international aid from governments and charities is needed.
Immediate tasks
The most urgent work for rescue groups and emergency services is to free people who are trapped or who are cut off by floodwaters and to move injured people to safety.
Even minor injuries can be fatal since wading through sewage and mud can cause wounds to become infected.
Whether they are injured or not, survivors need emergency housing, medical supplies, food, and water.
 ▲ Refugees from Hurricane Katrina (2005) pack the Astrodome sports stadium in Houston, Texas.
It is important to remove dead bodies from the disaster zone too since their presence is not only upsetting for survivors but soon leads to disease.
Bodies decaying in water that provides drinking supplies can cause outbreaks of gastroenteritis, which may be deadly when treatment and clean water are not available.
Cut off
It can be very difficult for help to reach the disaster area.
Even without flooding, debris can block or destroy roads, railways, and ports, making it impossible for people to move out of the area or for help to reach them.
Landslides or mud slides may destroy key bridges and roads.
If strong winds and rain continue after the hurricane, planes and helicopters may not be usable.
Leaving the area
Even after the hurricane, it may be necessary to evacuate the area if it is flooded or if more bad weather is expected.
If communication networks, road, and rail links have been damaged - or if they never existed - it can be very difficult to move people to safety.
 ▲ Rescuers save a baby from raging floodwaters near Guayama in the Caribbean after Hurricane Hortense (1996).
CASE STUDY
Hurricane Katrina, 2005
Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans on the coast of the United States in August 2005.
It broke the levees (walls that hold back the lake and river behind the city), and the city was flooded to depths of 19.8 feet (six meters).
Thousands of people were encouraged to make their way to sports stadiums and conference centers for temporary shelter.
But these centers lacked electricity, sanitation, air conditioning, and sufficient food and water.
Conditions soon deteriorated, with people living in filth and falling ill.
Terrible Aftermath
In the days and weeks following a hurricane, the extent of the damage to people’s lives as well as to property slowly emerges.
Whole families may have been killed, communities destroyed, and people’s lives changed forever.
Cleaning up
As soon as a hurricane is over, local, national, and international teams start rebuilding road and rail links so that emergency workers can reach people who are trapped or stranded.
They may need to clear debris, drain or pump out floodwater, and rebuild seawalls or levees to protect the area from further damage by other hurricanes and winds.
They also need to demolish unsafe buildings and clear the land.
 ▲ A settlement in Bangladesh devastated by a cyclone in 1991.
Devastated communities
Many people lose not only their homes but family members and friends when a catastrophic hurricane strikes.
For them, life will never be the same again.
When many people have suffered the same fate, it may seem as though the community itself can never be rebuilt.
In addition, the area may be left without essential amenities such as water, electricity, schools, hospitals, stores and transportation systems.
These can take years to rebuild.
Rebuilding
Often, people want to remain in the area where they have always lived, even if there is a danger of further hurricanes at some time in the future.
Planners and engineers can design buildings that will be safer in the face of future storms, but making storm-proof buildings can be very expensive.
Many areas prone to hurricanes are very poor and underdeveloped and people cannot afford the necessary precautions.
Their rebuilt houses remain vulnerable to future storms.
 ▲ A man clears up after a fire started by Hurricane Claudette (2003) wrecked his beach house in Texas.
CASE STUDY
Bangladesh, 1970
In November 1970, the worst cyclone disaster of the twentieth century struck East Pakistan (now Bangladesh), a low-lying coastal country northeast of India.
Between 300,000 and 500,000 people were killed.
Winds of up to 114 miles (190 kilometers) per hour lashed the coast, destroying the flimsy housing of the poor, causing the river Ganges to flood, and swamping essential farmland.
Bangladesh is an area often hit by cyclones.
Although some housing is built in a protected area, the poorest people cannot afford to live there.
However, there are now over 1,600 cyclone shelters in Bangladesh that one million people can use.
Environmental Impact
The impact on human lives and homes is the first concern of relief agencies and governments in the aftermath of a hurricane.
Yet the impact on the environment usually affects people too.
For many people, particularly in undeveloped and poor areas, the farmland, forests, and seas provide food or a livelihood.
Forests and farms
A hurricane can rip the trees and other vegetation from the land, destroying orchards and forests that have been growing for decades or centuries.
Hurricanes can also cause flooding from the sea or from rainstorms or from rivers bursting their banks.
In a flood, farmland and forests can be damaged by salt water or sewage.
Crops may not grow, and farm animals or wild animals may die.
For local people who live by farming or hunting, this disaster can lead to famine or economic collapse.
 ▲ Beech trees destroyed by hurricane-force winds in Kent, England, in 1987.
Flooding can also wash the topsoil from the land into rivers, making the land less fertile and the rivers shallower.
A shallow river is more likely to burst its banks and flood the land again.
Pollution
A hurricane can tear down factories and oil refineries, drive ships onto the rocks so that they spill their cargoes, and hurl all kinds of debris across the land and sea.
Oil escaping from damaged oil wells, refineries, or tanks or chemicals from industrial plants may contaminate both land and sea, with disastrous effects on wildlife.
If a local community relies on fishing, this kind of environmental damage can be disastrous.
Areas dependent on tourism for their income need to clean up very quickly to avoid an economic crisis.
 ▲ A boy in Bangladesh helps his goat to safety through floodwaters in 2004.
CORAL REEFS IN DANGER
In Samoa and other Pacific islands, coral reefs are often damaged by typhoons.
The large waves whipped up by a typhoon batter the reef, breaking off chunks that may have taken centuries to grow.
The sea carries broken lumps of coral into island lagoons, where they crash into inland reefs.
Topsoil washed from islands into the sea cuts off sunlight to the reef, preventing plant growth.
The nutrients in the soil encourage algae to grow in the sea, further disturbing the fragile balance of the reef.
Keeping an Eye on Things
Meteorologists monitor sea and wind conditions around the world to help provide early warning of coming tropical storms.
Even with the best computer modeling systems, though, the predictions meteorologists can make about tropical storms are not perfect.
Looking for trouble
Tide gauges show how the swell in the ocean grows as a storm is brewing.
Wind gauges measure the speed of the wind, although sometimes a hurricane, cyclone, or typhoon is so powerful it destroys the gauges that are measuring it.
Pictures beamed from satellites circling above the earth reveal the movement and patterns of storm clouds that may build into a hurricane or typhoon.
Information gathered from these instruments can be compared with data from previous hurricanes to help meteorologists predict whether a hurricane is building, where it will go, and how powerful it may be when it makes landfall.
Efficient tracking of hurricanes with satellites only began in about 1960.
Before then, many tropical storms went unrecorded if they did not hit populated areas.
Most of what we know about hurricanes in the past is derived from ships’ logs.
 ▲ A false-color radar image showing the intensity and direction of winds in Hurricane Dora (2005).
Being prepared
In some areas prone to tropical storms, people prepare for the worst.
In Australia and the Bahamas, many people have storm shutters on their houses.
Some have shelters - specially built strong rooms - where they can hide during the worst storms.
Hurricane drills are practice sessions in which people take refuge as though a tropical storm were on its way.
Drills help to make sure people know where to go and can take action to protect themselves if a storm really does arrive.
 ▲ A hurricane hunter flies into Hurricane Ophelia (2005).
HURRICANE HUNTERS
Hurricane hunters are planes that deliberately chase hurricanes, flying as close as possible and even trying to get into the eye of the hurricane and fly with it.
They can fly at heights of up to 7.2 miles (12 kilometers).
Hurricane hunters carry wind gauges called anemometers, used to measure the speed of the wind, and radar to measure the amount of rain.
The planes can also drop instruments attached to parachutes that measure wind conditions and transmit their readings along with their own location as they fall.
New robotic planes that fly without a pilot or crew will be able to carry out even more dangerous hurricane reconnaissance work.
Danger Ahead
Hurricanes have become stronger since the 1990s, and there may be more of them.
Some scientists suggest that they may become even more frequent and damaging in the future.
Hot seas
To form, a hurricane needs a warm sea beneath colliding winds.
Many scientists believe that the seas are becoming warmer as global warming takes effect.
Global warming is a rise in temperature across the whole planet, probably caused by people burning large quantities of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and gas) for energy.
As we burn fossil fuels, the gas carbon dioxide is released.
This builds up in the top layer of the atmosphere and acts like a blanket, stopping heat from escaping from the earth and making the planet warmer.
If the seas are warmer, the conditions needed for hurricanes to form will occur more often.
The number of category 4 or 5 hurricanes doubled between 1970 and 2005.
Over that time the top 990 feet (300 meters) of the sea warmed by 1.1 °F (0.5°C).
 ▲ A huge rebuilding program is needed to restore New Orleans following Hurricane Katrina (2005).
More floods
As the temperature on earth rises, ice at the north and south poles melts and pours into the sea, raising the level of the sea.
Coastal areas may flood, and during a hurricane it will take less water to flood farther inland.
The effects of hurricanes will be more damaging because flooding will happen more easily.
Areas outside current hurricane zones may be subject to floods too as sea levels rise.
Storm barriers built for current sea levels may offer little help.
Rising temperatures also cause more rain to fall with hurricanes, and that increases flooding too.
The rainfall that came with Hurricane Katrina in 2005 was, scientists estimate, 7 percent higher than it would have been without global warming.
 ▲ A color-coded map based on satellite images shows the variation in sea temperature around the globe.
OUTSIDE THE ZONE
In 2004, the first hurricane ever recorded in the South Atlantic rang warning bells for scientists.
It was unofficially named Catarina since it struck land in Santa Catarina, Brazil - there is no naming system for hurricanes in the South Atlantic since they have not happened before.
Scientists cannot tell yet whether hurricanes in the South Atlantic will become more common or whether it was a onetime event.
TEN OF THE DEADLIEST HURRICANES, CYCLONES, AND TYPHOONS
WHEN
WHERE
CASUALTIES
Bangladesh 300,000–500,000
Haiphong, Vietnam 300,000
Calcutta, India 300,000
Bay of Bengal 200,000
Bangladesh 139,000
Mumbai, India 100,000
Calcutta, India 60,000
Hakata Bay, Japan 45,000–65,000
Martinique, St. Eustatius, and Barbados (Great Hurricane) 22,000
Nicaragua and Honduras (Hurricane Mitch) 11,000
HURRICANE NAMES