Living things have average temperatures.
For humans, normal body temperature is 98.6 °F (37 °C).
For most birds, average body temperature is a little higher - from 104° to 108 °F (40° to 42 °C).
Planets, while not living entities, nevertheless also have average temperatures.
For Venus, the hottest planet in the solar system, the average surface temperature is about 867 °F (464 °C), hot enough to melt lead.
The average surface temperature of Mars is about –82 °F (–63 °C).
The average temperature on Earth is about 60 °F (16 °C).
Or at least, that’s the current figure.
Scientists have observed and noted that over the past 100 years the temperature of our planet has been rising.
And just as an above-normal body temperature is a warning sign of illness, a growing number of scientists are asserting that the rising surface temperature on Earth - a phenomenon known as global warming - is a global warning sign we need to heed.
Shrinking habitats, such as that for this polar bear and her cubs, is one possible outcome of an increasingly hotter planet.
Scientists predict that if the Arctic sea ice continues melting as projected, the polar bear population of 2050 may be one third of what it is today.
Johnny Johnson/Riser/Getty Images
In this book, readers will learn about the greenhouse effect and how it is connected to global warming.
Much like plants in a greenhouse, all of us on Earth are encased in an atmosphere that traps heat from the Sun.
Carbon dioxide, water vapor, methane, and other gases, which do the trapping, have been responsible for keeping the planet warm enough for life to thrive.
The issue before us all now, though, is that these so-called greenhouse gases are increasing - some believe dramatically - and with them their heat-trapping properties.
Such an increase and its impact on global climate are of great concern.
Why the increase?
As readers of this book will discover, with the onset of the Industrial Revolution some 200 years ago, machines began making the products people used to make by hand.
That development was followed by advances in transportation, such as the advent of the steam engine, the car, and the airplane.
These machines, running on fossil fuels, emit exhaust, sharply raising the concentrations of atmospheric gases that had, prior to 1800 or so, been relatively stable for thousands of years.
Today, about 90 percent of the power used to run machines comes from the burning of fossil fuels.
To further complicate matters, the widespread cutting down of forests means that trees - nature’s own carbon dioxide eaters (CO2 is used by trees to make their food) - are being removed from an equation that they might otherwise help to balance.
Whether or not global warming is a natural fluctuation or a human-caused phenomenon has been debated in the media, though scientists now widely agree that humans are indeed the cause of the past century’s steep temperature rise.
Evidence collected from thermometers for roughly the past 150 years as well as “paleoclimatic” data taken from glacial ice cores, tree rings, and other sources show that the surface temperature on Earth is indeed rising.
Glaciers are melting, animal habitats are dwindling, and “weather events” such as hurricanes, typhoons, and heat waves seem to be on the rise.
Read on to discover the science behind the debate, the effects rising temperatures are having and are projected to have, and what the world is doing in response.
The rise of air temperatures near Earth’s surface over the past century is known as global warming.
Earth has experienced periods of gradual warming and cooling throughout its existence due to natural causes, such as volcanic eruptions and variations in the Sun’s output.
However, scientists have attributed the current increase in global temperatures to human causes - primarily the release of certain gases into the atmosphere as a result of industrial activity.
These gases - collectively termed greenhouse gases - absorb and trap heat emitted from Earth’s surface through a phenomenon known as the greenhouse effect.
In addition to the rise in near-surface air temperatures, global warming encompasses other climatic changes caused by this warming, such as variations in precipitation patterns, winds, and ocean currents.
For this reason, the terms global warming and climate change are sometimes used interchangeably.
Some incoming sunlight is reflected by Earth’s atmosphere and surface, but most is absorbed by the surface, which is warmed.
Infrared (IR) radiation is emitted from Earth’s surface.
Some IR radiation escapes to space, but some is absorbed by greenhouse gases and reradiated toward Earth, where it further warms the surface and lower atmosphere.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
The greenhouse effect is so named because it resembles the warming of a botanical greenhouse, but the comparison is not a perfect one.
The glass walls of a greenhouse hold heat inside the building by trapping warmed air, preventing heat loss via convection.
In contrast, greenhouse gases absorb radiation emitted from Earth’s surface and direct it back to Earth, preventing radiant heat loss.
The greenhouse effect is a natural phenomenon that helps maintain temperatures suitable for life.
As sunlight enters Earth’s atmosphere, some of it is reflected back into space.
Most of it passes through the atmosphere, however, and heats Earth’s surface, which in turn emits some of this energy as infrared radiation.
In the atmosphere, some infrared radiation escapes into space but most is absorbed by greenhouse gases and directed back toward Earth, where it further warms Earth’s surface and lower atmosphere.
Without the warming due to the greenhouse effect, Earth’s surface temperature would be much colder than it is, with an average global temperature around 0 °F (–18 °C).
As a model of comparison, the planet Venus has a high concentration of carbon dioxide in its atmosphere.
The carbon dioxide does not allow the heat from the planet to escape into space, thus causing an extreme greenhouse effect resulting in surface temperatures as high as 840 °F (450 °C).
Mars’s atmosphere, on the other hand, contains low concentrations of carbon dioxide and so does not keep nearly as much of the planet’s thermal radiation from escaping.
In other words, Mars has a weak greenhouse effect, making its surface much colder than it would be if it had a strong one.
The average surface temperature of Mars is about –82 °F (–63 °C).
EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE
Earth, like other planets of the solar system, is enclosed in a thin shell of gas called an atmosphere.
The atmosphere clings tightly to Earth by the attraction of gravity.
The air composing the atmosphere moves freely - sometimes violently.
Earth’s atmosphere consists mainly of nitrogen, oxygen, argon, water vapor, carbon dioxide, and small amounts of other gases and solid and liquid particles.
Rainbow in the Scottish countryside.
Gary Yeowell/Stone/Getty Images
The atmosphere serves to moderate the extremes of heat and cold on Earth.
During the day as the heat of the Sun penetrates the air and warms Earth, the atmosphere traps this heat so that it escapes more slowly into space, making the night warmer than it would be without this effect.
The atmosphere also protects Earth’s inhabitants to some extent from meteor particles, cosmic rays, radiation from the sun and stars, atmospheric dust, and other hazards.
The atmosphere is in constant motion due to Earth’s rotation and changes in temperature and pressure.
The sometimes violent changes that take place in the atmosphere are experienced on Earth as weather, wind, ocean currents, lightning, and rainbows.
The most important greenhouse gas is water vapor, which occurs naturally in Earth’s atmosphere.
Most other greenhouse gases also occur naturally, but some are produced by human activity as well.
The main greenhouse gases with human sources are carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and halocarbons.
Carbon dioxide is produced naturally by animals through respiration.
The primary human-produced source of carbon dioxide is the burning of fossil fuels: coal, oil, and natural gas.
These fuels are widely used in electricity generation, transportation, and industry.
Another source of carbon dioxide from human activity is the clearing of forests for agriculture and other purposes.
Atmospheric methane concentrations are much lower than those of carbon dioxide, but they are more potent.
By weight, methane is 25 times more powerful at trapping heat than carbon dioxide over a 100-year time period.
Methane is produced naturally by, for example, the decay of vegetation in low-oxygen environments such as wetlands.
The major human-induced sources of methane include rice cultivation, livestock raising, the use of fossil fuels, and the decomposition of organic matter in landfills.
Nitrous oxide is produced naturally by biological reactions in both soil and water.
Human-induced sources include fertilizer use and fossil fuel burning.
By weight, its heat-trapping potential is about 300 times that of carbon dioxide over a 100-year time horizon.
Atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide remained relatively stable for thousands of years.
After the industrial era began in about 1750, the concentrations increased dramatically.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Halocarbons are low in concentration but have extremely high potencies - some with more than 10,000 times the warming effect of carbon dioxide by weight.
Halocarbons are very rare in nature but have been widely synthesized for industrial applications; they have been used as refrigerants, aerosol propellants, insulation, and cleaning solvents.
Halocarbons include chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs).
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) cites livestock such as cows as being large contributors of greenhouse gases, particularly methane.
EPA statistics show that cattle are responsible for about 20 percent of U.S. methane emissions.
Shutterstock.com
In nature, the sources of greenhouse gases are balanced, on average, by physical, chemical, and biological processes called “sinks” that remove the gases from the atmosphere.
For example, carbon dioxide sinks include photosynthesis, the process by which green plants use carbon dioxide to make food.
However, human activities have produced carbon dioxide in quantities that far exceed the offsetting capacity of natural sinks, leading to its accumulation in the atmosphere.
The same is true of other greenhouse gases such as methane and nitrous oxide.
When did people first become aware of the greenhouse effect and global warming?
In 1827 French mathematician Joseph Fourier discovered that Earth’s atmosphere trapped heat much like a greenhouse.
It was not until almost 70 years later, in 1896, that Swedish chemist and physicist Svante August Arrhenius proposed that Earth’s average temperature would rise due to the additional carbon dioxide that was accumulating in the atmosphere since the large-scale burning of fossil fuels began with the Industrial Revolution of the 18th and 19th centuries.
He hypothesized that as the growth of industry continued, carbon dioxide levels would continue to rise and cause an increase in Earth’s average surface air temperature.
However, it would take another 50 years before scientists gathered concrete data to prove his theory.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
In 1958 Charles David Keeling of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography began to measure the levels of carbon dioxide at the summit of Mauna Loa, a dormant volcano in Hawaii.
Over the following decades he charted a steady increase in carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere.
Keeling’s work provided the first evidence that carbon dioxide concentrations were rising in connection with fossil fuel use.
Charles Keeling’s observations of monthly carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations at Mauna Loa are charted.
The short dips and spikes are due to summer and winter in the Northern Hemisphere: the majority of Earth’s vegetation blooms in summer, thus reducing the CO2 levels through photosynthesis.
During winter the CO2 levels slightly increase.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Other climate scientists have built on Keeling’s pioneering research on greenhouse gases and have further demonstrated the role that humans have played in rising gas emissions.
Collected data show that the levels of carbon dioxide at present are 35 percent more than what they were before the Industrial Revolution began.
Globally, about 82 percent of human-induced carbon dioxide emissions come from the burning of fossil fuels while the other 18 percent result from deforestation.
The chart breaks down the 82 percent that come from fossil fuels into the sectors that account for the emissions.
The largest single source of carbon dioxide is coal-burning power plants.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Methane has more than doubled in atmospheric concentration since the Industrial Revolution.
Nitrous oxide and halocarbons have also significantly increased during this period.
SVANTE AUGUST ARRHENIUS
Svante August Arrhenius is known for his work in three different specialties within the broad fields of physics and chemistry: physical chemistry, the chemistry of immunology, and cosmic physics.
His contributions to physical chemistry earned him a Nobel Prize in 1903.
It was his research in cosmic physics, however, that made his name in global warming studies.
Cosmic physics was the term used by Arrhenius and his colleagues in the Stockholm Physics Society for their attempt to develop physical theories linking the phenomena of the seas, the atmosphere, and the land.
Debates in the society concerning the causes of the ice ages led Arrhenius to construct the first climate model of the influence of atmospheric carbon dioxide, published in 1896.
The model linked increases or decreases in the quantity of carbon dioxide to increases or decreases in temperature.
Applying the calculations of his model to natural processes, Arrhenius estimated the effect of the burning of fossil fuels as a source of atmospheric carbon dioxide.
He predicted that a doubling of carbon dioxide due to fossil fuel burning alone would take 500 years and lead to temperature increases 5 to 7 °F (about 3 to 4 °C).
This is probably what has earned Arrhenius his reputation as the first person to have provided a model for the effect of industrial activity on global warming.
Svante August Arrhenius in his laboratory, 1909.
© Photos.com/Jupiterimages
The dramatic increase in greenhouse gases and their effect on global climate are of great concern to scientists and others.
Computer models assessed in the report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in 2007 project a 3.2–7.2 °F (1.8–4.0 °C) rise in average surface temperature during the period from 1990 to 2100.
These projections are based on scientific models using scenarios that assume that humans do not make major changes in the energy system to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Should present trends in the emissions of greenhouse gases, particularly of carbon dioxide, continue, climatic changes larger than any ever experienced by modern human civilization are expected.
This could substantially alter natural and agricultural ecosystems, human and animal health, and climate patterns, increasing the incidence of droughts and major storms and disrupting living things and their interrelationships.
Scientists use a variety of methods and evidence to study global warming.
They analyze data collected by thermometers and other instruments from roughly 1850 to the present.
To study climate changes prior to that time, scientists use “paleoclimatic” data from such natural sources as ocean and lake sediments, ice core samples, and tree rings.
Finally, they use computers to produce models of Earth’s climate that can be used to understand past changes and predict future changes and effects of global warming.
Data collected since the mid-1800s show increases in global average temperature and sea level.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
ICE CORES
An ice core is a long cylinder of glacial ice recovered by drilling through glaciers in Greenland, Antarctica, and high mountains around the world.
Scientists retrieve these cores and saw them into frozen subsections to look for records of climate change over the last 100,000 years or more.
The drilling of ice cores began in the 1960s.
Since then, they have revealed previously unknown details of atmospheric composition, temperature, and abrupt changes in climate.
Such changes include “flickers” that appear to occur in periods lasting only 3 to 10 years - much more quickly than the traditional view of the pace of climate shifts.
Abrupt changes are of great concern for those who model future changes in climate and their potential impact on society.
Ice cores record millennia of ancient snowfalls, which gradually turned to glacier ice.
In areas of high accumulation, such as low-latitude mountain glaciers and the Greenland ice sheet, annual layers of ice representing tens of thousands of years can be seen and counted, often with the unaided eye.
Scientists melt some of the ice to retrieve the most important data, namely, the ratio of oxygen and hydrogen isotopes that come directly from the water of ancient snows.
Isotopes are atoms of the same chemical element that vary in weight.
The isotope ratios in ice cores are representative of precipitation and therefore ultimately reveal the composition of the source moisture, the sea.
The ratios are also representative of air temperature and the distance that clouds have traveled.
Isotopes are thus an indicator for climate change.
Atmospheric composition is measured in air bubbles trapped in the snow as it was compressed and recrystallized into ice.
Measurements of carbon dioxide and methane in the air bubbles show that there have been changes in the concentration of these greenhouse gases over time.
The levels of both are much lower during glacial periods, lower than even pre-industrial levels in the modern atmosphere.
This suggests that greenhouse gas levels are linked to climate.
Although some records are available from the 1600s and 1700s, systematic measurements of climate did not begin until the mid-1800s.
The data include measurements of surface temperature over land and the oceans, precipitation amounts, sea-ice extents, and global sea levels.
Since the 1970s, satellite studies have provided additional data on temperature trends at Earth’s surface and through the layers of the atmosphere.
In addition, data-collection platforms in the oceans measure temperature and other properties of seawater.
Paleoclimatic data allow scientists to reconstruct climate changes over many thousands of years.
Some sources, such as most sediment samples and pollen records, are only detailed enough to describe climate changes on long time scales.
Other sources, such as growth measurements from tree rings and gases extracted from ice core samples, can provide a record of yearly or seasonal climate changes.
Gas bubbles trapped in ice samples from 10,000 feet (3,000 meters) beneath Antarctica contain gases that were in the atmosphere 900,000 years ago.
Computerized climate models can be used to investigate the climate’s natural variability as well as its response to greenhouse gas emissions.
Models vary considerably in their degree of complexity.
Even the most detailed models cannot account for all of the processes that affect the atmosphere and oceans.
Nevertheless, many models perform very well in reproducing the basic factors that influence climate.
This NASA image shows locations on Antarctica where temperatures increased between 1957 and 2006.
West Antarctica, in red, is where temperatures increased the most over the 50-year period. (
Temperature changes are measured in degrees Celsius.)
NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center Scientific Visualization Studio
The leading international organization in the study of global warming is the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which was established in 1988 by the World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environment Programme.
The IPCC assesses and summarizes the latest scientific, technical, and socioeconomic data on climate change and publishes its findings in reports that are presented to international organizations and policy makers throughout the world.
Thousands of the world’s leading climate change experts have worked under the IPCC.
AL GORE AND AN INCONVENIENT TRUTH
One of the most prominent voices warning of the dangers of global warming is that of Al Gore.
After an unsuccessful run for the U.S. presidency in 2000, Gore devoted much of his time to environmental issues.
The 2006 documentary An Inconvenient Truth features a multimedia presentation delivered by Gore from the stage of a small theater.
The film formed the basis for Gore’s traveling lecture tour on the emerging human challenge of global warming and climate change.
Movie poster from An Inconvenient Truth (2006), directed by Davis Guggenheim and starring Al Gore.
Paramount Classics and Participant Productions.
© Paramount Classics, a division of Paramount Pictures; all rights reserved.
In the film, Gore juxtaposes the science behind global warming with elements from his own personal and political life, mixing seriousness with humor to convey his message.
His presentation uses a collection of graphs, photographs, and other imagery to describe the greenhouse effect, changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations throughout history, human energy use and population growth, and how all these forces contribute to global warming.
In the second half of the film, Gore describes some of the projected effects of global warming, citing some of the early signs of changing conditions in the Arctic and Antarctic.
The film concludes with Gore addressing common misconceptions surrounding global warming and challenging viewers to bring about needed changes to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Gore’s descriptions of climatic processes and warming extrapolations have been criticized, particularly by skeptics of global warming.
However, climate scientists maintain that the science depicted in the film is largely accurate.
An Inconvenient Truth won Academy Awards in 2006 for best feature-length documentary feature and best song.
Since its release the film has been made part of the curricula of many schools around the world.
In 2007 Gore was awarded, with the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to raise awareness about global warming.
The IPCC’s reports have documented the progress of global warming and shown a growing consensus on the role of human activity in the phenomenon.
The 2007 report stated that the 20th century saw an increase in global average surface temperature of 1.3 °F (0.74 °C), and it forecasted an additional increase of 3.2° to 7.2 °F (1.8° to 4.0 °C) by 2100 if measures are not put in place to reduce human-caused emissions of greenhouse gases.
The authors of the 2007 report also stated with at least 90 percent certainty that most of the warming since about 1950 had been caused by human activity.
The findings of the IPCC were endorsed by many scientific organizations, including the national science academies of the United States and all the other G-8 (industrialized) countries as well as those of China, India, and Brazil.
How much temperatures will rise in the future will depend largely on the rate of greenhouse gas emissions.
The IPCC based its projected range of temperature increase on a number of emissions scenarios, none of which include policies designed to reduce global warming.
Most scientists agree that the effects of global warming will become much more severe if the total increase above pre-industrial temperature exceeds 3.6 °F (2 °C).
Only scenarios that include major reductions in emissions are likely to hold warming below that level.
The world is not warming uniformly.
Surface air temperatures have increased more rapidly over land than over the oceans, a trend that is expected to continue.
Thus, the Northern Hemisphere - with less than 40 percent of its surface area covered by water - is expected to warm faster than the Southern Hemisphere.
The greatest increase in surface temperature is projected over the Arctic, due in part to the melting of snow and ice on land and sea.
Snow and ice reflect some of the Sun’s heat back into space; a reduction in the surface area covered by snow and ice means that more heat will stay in the lower atmosphere, causing more melting, which causes more warming, and so on.
The Arctic is already warming twice as fast as the rest of the planet.
Warming in the 21st century is projected to be greatest over land and in the high northern latitudes.
The projections on these maps are based on a midrange emissions scenario and are relative to the period 1980–99.
Residents of an Indonesian city near the capital, Jakarta, make their way through a flooded street on Oct. 26, 2010, during what is normally the region’s dry season.
Adek Berry/AFP/Getty Images
Global warming has already led to changes in precipitation patterns across the globe, and these are projected to continue.
There has been an observed increase in heavy downpours in most areas.
Continued precipitation increases are projected in the polar and subpolar regions, with decreases in the middle latitudes.
An increase in rainfall is expected near the Equator, and a decrease in rainfall is expected in the subtropics.
Changes in precipitation patterns are projected to increase further the chances of extreme weather in many areas.
Decreased summer precipitation in North America, Europe, and Africa, combined with greater rates of evaporation due to rising temperatures, is predicted to lead to increased droughts.
In other regions, greater rates of both evaporation and precipitation will likely cause an increase in very heavy rainfall that can lead to flooding.
DROUGHT
One possible effect of global warming is an increase in droughts.
A drought is a lack or insufficient amount of rain for an extended period of time.
Drought causes water shortages, crop damage, streamflow reduction, and the depletion of groundwater and soil moisture, and it has a serious negative impact on agriculture.
There are four basic types of drought: unpredictable drought, permanent drought, seasonal drought, and invisible drought.
Unpredictable drought is the abnormal failure of rainfall in an area where rainfall is normally adequate.
Such droughts usually do not affect a very large area and generally occur in regions that are scientifically classified as humid or subhumid.
One example of an unpredictable drought was the Dust Bowl of the early 1930s, the worst drought in American history.
Winds carried away the topsoil from millions of acres of American farmland, from North Dakota to Texas and from Colorado to Missouri.
The drought drove away more than half the region’s population.
Permanent drought characterizes the driest climates, such as the arid parts of the American Southwest or East Africa.
In such regions agriculture is impossible without permanent irrigation.
Normally under a lake - Lake Mead, on the Arizona-Nevada border - this cracked earth is the result of an extended drought coupled with increased water demand caused by rapid population growth.
The lake has dropped to its lowest level since the 1960s.
Ethan Miller/Getty Images
Seasonal drought occurs in climates that have well-defined rainy and dry seasons.
Such regions are said to have tropical or subtropical climates.
Many of these regions lie near the Equator: the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia, and portions of Africa, Central America, and South America.
Southern California and southern Australia are also subject to seasonal droughts.
For agriculture to be successful, planting must be adjusted so growth will take place in the rainy season.
Invisible drought occurs in summer when elevated temperatures induce high rates of evaporation.
Even frequent showers cannot replace the lost water.
This results in a borderline water deficiency that reduces crop yields.
Glaciers around the world are melting as a result of global warming.
A series of three photos - taken in 1938, 1981, and 2006 - shows the decline of Grinnell Glacier, in Glacier National Park in Montana.
The lake formed by the glacier’s meltwater grows each year.
T.J. Hileman/Glacier National Park Archives; Karen Holzer/USGS; Carl Key/USGS
A very visible effect of climate change has been the steady melting of sea ice and glaciers, especially in the Arctic.
The IPCC has projected that the Arctic could be virtually free of summer sea ice by 2070, and more recent studies project that this could occur several decades sooner.
The melting of land-based ice, from glaciers around the world and the large ice sheets on Greenland and Antarctica, has already contributed to sea-level rise, and further increases are projected.
Another factor in the sea-level rise, also driven by global warming, is thermal expansion of the oceans - that is, seawater takes up more space as its temperature rises.
This thermal expansion and the melting of land-based ice have already caused a rise of about 8 inches (20 centimeters) in the global sea level.
Rising sea levels associated with global warming could submerge islands and coastal lowlands throughout the world.
Areas at risk include the Gulf coast and Eastern seaboard in the United States and The Netherlands in Europe.
Because heat spreads slowly through water, the oceans are likely to continue to warm for at least several centuries in response to the increases in greenhouse gas concentrations that have already taken place.
If greenhouse gas emissions continue at their early–21st-century rate, the combination of thermal expansion and land-based ice melt is predicted to raise the global sea level at least 1 to 3 feet (0.33 to 1 meter) by 2100.
The rise in sea level could be much greater in the longer term.
It is probable that the continued warming of Greenland will lead to faster melting of its ice sheet.
Paleoclimatic evidence suggests than an additional 3.6 °F (2 °C) of warming could ultimately cause complete melting of the Greenland ice sheet, which would cause sea level to rise an additional 20 feet (7 meters).
Such an increase would submerge many islands and lowland regions.
The lowland regions at risk include substantial parts of the U.S. Gulf coast and Eastern seaboard (including roughly the lower third of Florida), much of The Netherlands and Belgium, and heavily populated tropical areas such as Bangladesh.
This level of warming could also accelerate melting of the West Antarctic ice sheet, raising global sea level an additional 15 feet (5 meters).
The impact of global warming on tropical cyclones (including hurricanes and typhoons) is the subject of intense research.
It appears likely that rising tropical ocean temperatures will increase the intensity of tropical cyclones.
In recent decades scientists have seen a close relationship between warming temperatures in the Atlantic Ocean and an increase in the strength of hurricanes.
Trends in the intensities of cyclones in other regions, such as in the tropical Pacific and Indian Oceans, are more uncertain due to a lack of reliable long-term measurements.
Weather events such as tropical cyclones are expected to increase in strength as a result of global warming.
This photo, taken on Oct. 23, 2010, shows Typhoon Megi sending up a wall of water near an apartment building in southern China.
Earlier, the typhoon had cut a destructive path across the Philippines.
Dozens of people were killed in the storm.
AFP/Getty Images
Global warming is already affecting ecosystems and thus the biodiversity of plants, animals, and other forms of life.
Living things establish their geographic ranges by adapting to their environment, including long-term climate patterns.
Relatively sudden climate changes caused by global warming could shrink species habitats, challenging the adaptive abilities of many species, especially those with already restricted ranges.
Some plants and animals, both on land and in the sea, have already shifted their ranges in response to warming temperatures.
For example, biologists have found that certain species of butterflies and birds in the Northern Hemisphere have moved their ranges northward.
In the Arctic, the walrus is among the animals whose habitats might be adversely affected by climate change.
© www.istockphoto.com/John Pitcher
Surface warming has already begun to affect biological processes in some species.
For example, trees are producing leaves earlier in the spring, birds are laying eggs earlier, and mammals are ending hibernation earlier.
Warming is also influencing the seasonal migration patterns of birds, fishes, and other animals.
In the Arctic, continued melting of sea ice threatens such animals as polar bears, seals, and walrus.
In western Hudson Bay, Canada, the physical condition and reproductive success of polar bears significantly declined in the 1980s and ’90s as sea ice decreased.
According to a study by the United States Geological Survey, two-thirds of the world’s polar bears, including all those in Alaska, could be gone by 2050 due to the ongoing loss of sea ice.
Climate change may also affect marine ecosystems by altering food supplies.
The combination of warming waters, decreased sea ice, and other changes to the oceans in the high latitudes could lead to reductions or redistributions of algae and plankton.
As a result, fish and other animals that feed on these organisms may be threatened.
Near Antarctica, the number of krill has declined as the ocean has warmed.
This, in turn, has led to a decline in the numbers of penguins and seals that depend on krill for food.
Ultimately, climate change is expected to play a role in the extinction of certain plants and animals.
Biologists have estimated that a warming of between 2.7 and 4.5 °F (1.5 and 2.5 °C) could put one-fifth to one-third of all plant and animal species at an increased risk of extinction.
This range of temperature increase is possible by the year 2100 in even the lower-end emissions scenarios prepared by the IPCC.
Estimates of species loss climb to as much as two-fifths for a warming of more than 8.1 °F (4.5 °C).
Average global temperatures could increase to this level in the 21st century according to the IPCC’s higher-end emissions scenarios.
The socioeconomic effects of global warming and climate change could be substantial, especially in the areas of agriculture, forestry, water supply, human health, and infrastructure.
In some of these areas the impact of warming temperatures is already evident.
Climate change has so far had a mixed impact on agriculture.
Regions in the mid-to-high latitudes have had an earlier spring and a longer growing season, which has modestly boosted crop yields.
If warming surpasses 5.4 °F (3 °C), however, productivity is expected to decrease in these regions.
In tropical and subtropical areas, agricultural production has already been affected negatively by global warming.
The Sahel region of Africa has seen crop failures, and accompanying famines, due to intense and more frequent droughts.
Elsewhere, floods caused by climate change could hurt productivity.
In some places farmers have changed their practices in an attempt to adapt to changing conditions - for example, they plant crops earlier in the growing season.
This malnourished mother and child are two of millions who have faced severe hunger in northern Africa’s drought-prone Sahel region.
AFP/Getty Images
The effect of global warming on forestry has also been mixed.
Forests of the Northern Hemisphere have taken advantage of the longer growing season.
However, this advantage has been offset in some places by other changes brought on by global warming.
In North America, for example, forests from British Columbia to Alaska have suffered from severe beetle infestations and an increase in forest fires encouraged by the warmer weather.
Global warming and climate change are expected to affect water supplies across the globe.
At current rates of warming, by the middle of the 21st century, scientists have predicted a 10 to 40 percent decrease in water availability in parts of the tropics and subtropics.
In some places water availability is already declining because of drought.
Such regions as the African Sahel, western North America, southern Africa, the Middle East, and western Australia are particularly vulnerable.
Elsewhere, the reduction of snow pack and shrinking of glaciers will likely cause serious water shortages.
Less snow accumulation and earlier seasonal snowmelt will affect places that depend on a long, slow melt for their summer water supply, such as the western United States, which gets 75 percent of its surface water from snow pack.
Places that rely on glacial melting for their water - particularly near the Himalayas in Asia and the Andes Mountains in South America - face an even greater risk because glaciers, unlike snow, cannot be replenished.
Human health will be affected by climate change in a number of ways.
The spread of infectious diseases will likely change because the ranges of disease carriers, such as insects and rodents, are often determined by climate.
Warmer winters in the Korean Peninsula and southern Europe, for example, have allowed the spread of Anopheles, a mosquito that carries the malaria virus.
In addition, a warmer winter in New York in 1999 appears to have been partly responsible for the outbreak of West Nile virus, which then spread across the country.
Climate change is also expected to increase malnutrition due to food shortages and cause more cases of diarrhea, cardiorespiratory illness, and allergies as a result of rising pollen levels.
Rising temperatures could also increase the frequency of killer heat waves, such as the one that killed tens of thousands of people in Europe in 2003.
The heightened risk of severe weather, flooding, and wildfire associated with global warming is expected to threaten the infrastructure of many countries.
Homes, dams, transportation networks, and other facets of infrastructure could be affected.
Rising sea levels and more intense tropical cyclones (hurricanes) are a particular threat to coastal areas.
Poor people in the densely populated, low-lying regions of Africa, Asia, and tropical islands will be the most vulnerable because of their limited ability to adapt.
Since the 1980s global warming has been the subject of a debate over the extent and seriousness of rising surface temperatures, the possible effects of observed and future warming, and the need for action to reduce warming and deal with its consequences.
Some people have stressed the role of natural forces in past climatic variations, arguing that the current warming trend is part of a natural cycle.
They point to uncertainties in the science of climate change, maintaining that predictions of dire consequences are exaggerated.
Leading climate scientists now agree, however, that rising concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere resulting from human activity are primarily responsible for rising temperatures and associated climate changes.
The scientists stress that if emissions are left unchecked, the impacts of warming will become much more severe in the 21st century and beyond.
The burning of trees to clear land for farming, as in this forest in the Amazon region of Brazil, severely hampers nature’s ability to remove carbon dioxide from the air.
Daniel Beltra/The Image Bank/Getty Images
As the scientific consensus on global warming has evolved, governments around the world have begun to develop policies to address the threat.
Public policy related to global warming and climate change may be divided into two types: adaptation and mitigation.
Experts say that both types will be needed to respond to global warming.
The goal of adaptation policy is to improve the ability of communities to face the challenges of a changing climate.
For example, some policies encourage farmers to change their practices in response to seasonal changes.
Other policies are designed to prepare cities located in coastal areas for elevated sea levels.
Adaptation policy addresses the immediate consequences of climate change.
But reducing the impact of climate change requires addressing the fundamental cause - the production of greenhouse gases.
This is the goal of mitigation policy.
This type of policy focuses mainly on reducing the use of fossil fuels in electricity generation and transportation, which account for most greenhouse gas emissions.
One mitigation strategy that most economists consider essential to combating global warming is putting a price on carbon - that is, holding the producers of greenhouse gases economically responsible for their emissions.
The idea is to provide a financial incentive for industries to reduce their dependence on fossil fuels and invest in low-carbon technologies.
One method of establishing a carbon price is to tax polluting companies for each ton of carbon dioxide they emit.
Another method is carbon trading - a system that sets a limit on total carbon dioxide emissions and allows companies to buy and sell emissions permits.
In other words, a company that emits more than its share of carbon dioxide has to buy permits from a company whose emissions fall below its target.
In 2005 the European Union (EU) instituted the world’s first multilateral carbon trading system.
On an international scale, carbon trading could result in industrialized countries buying permits from developing countries.
In addition to encouraging the industrialized countries to reduce their emissions, such a system would give developing countries the resources to invest in alternative energy sources of their own.
The development of energy-efficient and renewable energy technologies is another key to mitigation policy.
Some policies encourage using electricity more efficiently - for example, by mandating that appliances use less energy.
Others encourage the use of energy sources that do not produce carbon dioxide, such as wind and solar power, and biomass - plant materials that can be used to make fuels and produce electricity.
These alternative energy sources have the added advantage of being renewable, or constantly replenished; in contrast, the supply of fossil fuels is limited and dwindling.
Other mitigation policies seek to improve the energy efficiency of vehicles.
A successful example is the development of cars called hybrids, which cut emissions by using an electric motor along with a small gasoline motor.
RENEWABLE ENERGY
Renewable energy - also called alternative energy - comes from a number of replenishable sources.
The Sun is the source of solar energy.
Other forms of renewable energy come from wind (wind power), rivers (hydroelectric power), hot springs (geothermal energy), tides (tidal power), and biomass (biofuels).
A geothermal power station in Iceland creates electricity from heat generated in Earth’s interior.
© Barbara Whitney
At the beginning of the 21st century, renewable energy sources accounted for nearly 20 percent of global energy consumption.
Much of this total came from traditional uses of biomass such as wood for heating and cooking.
Today about 15 percent of the world’s total electricity comes from large hydroelectric power plants, whereas other types of renewable energy (such as solar, wind, and geothermal) account for about 3 percent of total electricity generation.
Growth in wind power exceeded 20 percent and solar devices grew at 30 percent annually in the 1990s, and renewable energy technologies continue to expand.
By 2007 more than 60 countries had adopted policy targets to increase the proportion of energy they derive from renewable sources.
The EU, which produced an estimated 6.38 percent of its energy from renewable sources in 2005, adopted a goal in 2007 to raise that figure to 20 percent by 2020.
The goal includes plans to cut emissions of carbon dioxide by 20 percent and to ensure that 10 percent of all fuel consumption come from biofuels.
In the United States, numerous states have responded to concerns over climate change and reliance on imported fossil fuels by setting goals to increase renewable energy over time.
For example, California has required its major utility companies to produce 33 percent of their electricity from renewable sources by 2020.
 Windmills on a hillside in California are used to generate electricity.
© MedioImages/Getty Images
 Significant energy resources that power human activities.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
 Tidal barrage power systems take advantage of differences between high tides and low tides by using a “barrage,” or type of dam, to block receding water during ebb periods.
At low tide, water behind the barrage is released, and the water passes through a turbine that generates electricity.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
 Wind turbines extract energy from the wind, mostly for electricity production, by rotation of a propeller-like set of blades that drive a generator contained inside an enclosure called a nacelle.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
An emerging technology with great potential for limiting global warming is carbon sequestration.
In this process, carbon dioxide emitted from factories or power stations is captured and stored underground or underwater.
The gas is pumped into natural reservoirs, such as depleted oil and natural gas fields.
Proponents of carbon sequestration believe that it could store vast quantities of carbon dioxide safely and permanently.
However, the technology is still unproven.
International efforts to address global warming have been complicated by the national interests of various countries.
The most divisive issue has been determining the differing responsibilities of developed (industrialized) and developing countries in reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Countries from both groups have claimed that emissions limits could dampen their economies.
The first major multinational agreement aimed at curtailing greenhouse gas emissions was the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNF CCC).
It was signed by representatives of 154 countries at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, or Earth Summit, in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.
The stated objective of the convention was the stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous human interference with the climate system.
The convention called for industrialized countries to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels, but it set no deadline for this target.
After more than two years of discussions and negotiations, representatives from more than 150 countries in 1997 forged the landmark Kyoto Protocol at a United Nations conference in Kyoto, Japan.
After a long ratification process, the protocol went into force in 2005.
The protocol called for participating industrialized countries to reduce their emissions of six greenhouse gases.
The overall goal was a reduction of approximately 5 percent below 1990 levels by no later than 2012.
The protocol set different reduction targets for different countries.
For example, it called for an 8 percent decrease among countries of the EU and a 7 percent decrease in the United States.
Japan received a target of a 6 percent decrease.
The protocol did not require developing countries to restrict their emissions at that time.
Reasons for this differentiation include the fact that carbon dioxide remains in the atmosphere for over a century, so the warming to date is primarily the result of a century’s worth of emissions from the industrialized world.
Per capita (per person) emissions are much greater in the industrialized countries, and these countries have more resources with which to make the required changes.
As seen in this map of annual carbon dioxide emissions, the United States and China have the dubious distinction of being the world’s largest contributers of greenhouse gases.
Delegation members at the United Nations climate change convention in Kyoto, Japan, in December 1997.
Toru Yamanaka/AFP/Getty Images
The Kyoto Protocol provided several ideas for countries to reach their targets.
One approach was to make use of natural processes, such as planting trees, which remove carbon dioxide from the air.
Another approach was the international program called the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).
This program encouraged developed countries to invest in technology and infrastructure in less-developed countries, where there were often significant opportunities to reduce emissions.
Under the CDM, the investing country could count its work reducing the emissions in the less-developed country toward meeting its own obligations under the protocol.
An example would be investing in a clean-burning natural gas power plant to replace a proposed coal-fired plant.
A third approach was emissions trading.
This plan allowed participating countries to buy and sell emissions rights.
For example, a country that did not use up its allotted emissions would receive a credit.
Later the country would be able to sell the credit to another country that was unable to meet its quota.
According to the protocol, countries that failed to meet their emissions targets would be penalized.
They would be not only required to make up the difference between their targeted and actual emissions but also pay a penalty amount of 30 percent.
The emission targets for periods after 2012 were to be established in future protocols.
A natural gas storage facility in eastern Germany.
Jens Schlueter/AFP/Getty Images
The Kyoto Protocol was widely hailed as an important step in addressing the long-term challenge of global warming.
Nevertheless, some critics questioned its effectiveness.
One concern was that the goals set forth were not strict enough to make a global difference.
Another concern was the rejection of the protocol by the United States.
In 2006 the United States dropped to second place behind China among the world’s leading emitters of greenhouse gases.
With just one fourth of China’s population, however, the United States remains the leading per capita emitter by far.
Nevertheless, the U.S. government refused to back the protocol because of its failure to set mandatory emission reductions for developing countries.
Indeed, the lack of restrictions in such rapidly industrializing countries as China and India was another reason why the protocol’s success was far from assured.
Countries differ in opinion on how to proceed with international global warming policy after the 2012 target date set by the Kyoto Protocol.
The European Union supports the continuation of a legally binding collective approach in the form of another protocol under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
The United States has backed emissions reductions through voluntary action and the encouragement of new energy technologies.
However, analyses including reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change as well as the British government’s Stern Review, a 2006 study of the worldwide economic impact of global warming, have concluded that only aggressive cuts in emissions (on the order of 80 percent reductions globally in the 21st century) have a reasonable chance of keeping global warming below the 3.6 °F (2 °C) threshold associated with severe consequences.
All countries face the challenge of sustainable development - that is, reducing their greenhouse gas emissions while still promoting economic development.
Some opponents of those calling for corrective action maintain that the costs of stemming global warming will be too high.
Economists and a growing number of policy makers, however, argue that early action will be much less costly than dealing with severe climatic changes in the future.