In all one's lifetime, it is oneself that one spends the most time being with or dealing with.
But it is precisely oneself that one has the least understanding of.
When you are going upwards in life you tend to overestimate yourself.
It seems that everything you seek for is within your reach; luck and opportunities will come your way and you are overjoyed that they constitute part of your worth.
When you are going downhill you tend to underestimate yourself, mistaking difficulties and adversities for your own incompetence.
It's likely that you think it wise for yourself to know your place and stay aloof from worldly success.
In doing so, you are actually wearing a mask of cowardice, behind which the flow of sap in your life will be retarded.
To get a thorough understanding of oneself is to gain a correct view of oneself and be a sober realist - aware of both one's strength and shortage.
You may look forward hopefully to the future but be sure not to expect too much, for ideals can never be fully realized.
You may be courageous to meet challenges but it should be clear to you where to direct your efforts.
That's to say, so long as you have a perfect knowledge of yourself, there won't be difficulties you can't overcome, nor obstacles you can't surmount.
To get a thorough understanding of oneself needs self-appreciation.
Whether you liken yourself to a towering tree or a blade of grass, whether you think you are a high mountain or a small stone, you represent a state of nature that has its own raison d'être.
If you earnestly admire yourself, you'll have a real sense of self-appreciation, which will give you confidence.
As soon as you gain full confidence in yourself, you'll be enabled to fight and overcome any adversity.
To get a thorough understanding of oneself also requires doing oneself a favor when it's needed.
In time of anger, do yourself a favor by giving vent to it in a quiet place so that you won't be hurt by its flames; in time of sadness, do yourself a favor by sharing it with your friends so as to change a gloomy mood into a cheerful one; in time of tiredness, do yourself a favor by getting a good sleep or taking some tonic.
Show yourself loving concern about your health and daily life.
As you are aware, what a person physically has is but a human body that's vulnerable when exposed to the elements.
So if you fall ill, it's up to you to take good care of yourself.
Unless you know perfectly when and how to do yourself a favor, you won't be confident and ready enough to resist the attack of illness.
To get a thorough understanding of oneself is to get a full control of one's life.
Then one will find one's life full of color and flavor.
Mr. Darwin was an old grouch, and everyone in town knew it.
Kids knew not to go into his yard to pick a yummy apple, even off the ground, because old Darwin, they said, would come after you with his BB gun.
One Friday, 12-year-old Janny was going to stay all night with her friend Emma.
They had to walk by Darwin's house on the way to Emma's house, but as they got close Janny saw him sitting on his front porch and suggested they cross over to the other side of the street.
Like most of the children, she was scared of the old man because of the stories she'd heard about him.
Emma said not to worry, Mr. Darwin wouldn't hurt anyone.
Still, Janny was growing more nervous with each step closer to the old man's house.
When they got close enough, Darwin looked up with his usual frown, but when he saw it was Emma, a broad smile changed his entire countenance as he said, "Hello, Miss Emma.
I see you've got a little friend with you today. "
Emma smiled back and told him Janny was staying overnight and they were going to listen to music and play games.
Darwin told them that sounded fun, and offered them each a fresh picked apple off his tree.
They gladly accepted, Darwin had the best apples in town.
When they got out of Darwin's earshot, Janny asked Emma, "Everyone says he's the meanest man in town.
How come he was so nice to us? "
Emma explained that when she first started walking past his house he wasn't very friendly and she was afraid of him, but she pretended he was wearing an invisible smile and so she always smiled back at him.
It took a while, but one day he half-smiled back at her.
After some more time, he started smiling real smiles and then started talking to her.
Just a "hello" at first, then more.
She said he always offers her an apple now, and is always very kind.
" An invisible smile?"
questioned Janny.
" Yes," answered Emma, "my grandma told me that if I pretended I wasn't afraid and pretended he was smiling an invisible smile at me and I smiled back at him, then sooner or later he really would smile.
Grandma says smiles are contagious. "
If we remember what Emma's grandma said, that everyone wears an invisible smile, we too will find that most people can't resist our smile after a while.
We're always on the go trying to accomplish so much, aren't we?
Hauling the kids around, getting groceries, cleaning the house, mowing the yard, it's always something.
It's so easy to get caught up in everyday life that we forget how simple it can be to bring cheer to ourselves and others.
Giving a smile away takes so little effort and time, let's make sure that we're not the one that others have to pretend is wearing an invisible smile.
When you walk into a party or gathering where everyone is smiling and laughing, it's mighty easy to get into a good mood and get into the spirit of the occasion.
On the other hand, just walk into a room where the gloom hangs heavily in the air and people are frowning, and it's equally as easy to start feeling a little lower in spirit.
It all starts somewhere, and if not with you and I, then where?
All it takes to uplift the day is to remember to give that smile away!
You can't save them, you can't store them, the only way they're any good is to share them.
Start by giving yourself a nice, big smile when you're in the bathroom getting ready for the day.
Look right in the mirror and smile at yourself and tell yourself it's going to be a great day as you do.
You'll be surprised at how much more often you will have great days.
To be sure, nothing unusual may happen other than you've improved your outlook.
Attitude is everything.
If your life feels like it is lacking the power that you want and the motivation that you need, sometimes all you have to do is to shift your point of view.
By training your thoughts to concentrate on the bright side of things, you are more likely to have the incentive to follow through on your goals.
You are less likely to be held back by negative ideas that might limit your performance.
Your life can be enhanced, and your happiness enriched, when you choose to change your perspective.
Don't leave your future to chance, or wait for things to get better mysteriously on their own.
You must go in the direction of your hopes and aspirations.
Begin to build your confidence, and work through problems rather than avoid them.
Remember that power is not necessarily to control over situations, but the ability to deal with whatever comes your way.
Always believe that good things are possible, and remember that mistakes can be lessons that lead to discoveries.
Take your fear and transform it into trust; learn to rise above anxiety and doubt.
Turn your "worry hours" into "productive hours".
Take the energy that you have wasted and direct it toward every worthwhile effort that you can be involved in.
You will see beautiful things happen when you allow yourself to experience the joys of life.
You will find happiness when you adopt positive thinking into your daily routine and make it an important part of your world.
I've learned that sometimes all a person needs is a hand to hold and a heart to understand.
I've learned that love, not time, heals all wounds.
I've learned that everyone you meet deserves to be greeted with a smile.
I've learned that there's nothing sweeter than sleeping with your babies and feeling their breath on your cheeks.
I've learned that no one is perfect until you fall in love with them.
I've learned that opportunities are never lost; someone will take the ones you miss.
I've learned that when you harbor bitterness, happiness will dock elsewhere.
I've learned that I wish I could have told my mom that I love her one more time before she passed away.
I've learned that one should keep his words both soft and tender, because tomorrow he may have to eat them.
I've learned that a smile is an inexpensive way to improve your looks.
I've learned that I can't choose how I feel, but I can choose what I do about it.
I've learned that everyone wants to stand on top of the mountain, but all the happiness and growth occur while you're climbing it.
I've learned that it is best to give advice in only two circumstances: when it is requested and when it is a life-threatening situation.
I've learned that the less time I have to work with, the more thing I get done.
When the moon is fullest it begins to wane, when it is darkest it begins to grow.
There is a calm wisdom in this old saying that impressed me when I heard it first from a monk of a Buddhist monastery in China.
It has often helped me to retain a good measure of equanimity under stress and hardship as well as when some unexpected success or good luck might have made me too exuberant.
There is hope and consolation in the sure knowledge that even the darkest hours of pains and troubles won't last, but also a warning against overrating the passing glories of wealth, power and great good fortune.
A warning and a hope, not only for the individual, but also for governments, nations and their leaders, a brief summing up of all that history and human experience can tell us.
And beyond all that we might hear in an echo of law and order that holds our universe in safe balance.
If you expect something to turn out badly, it probably will.
Pessimism is seldom disappointed.
But the same principle also works in reverse.
If you expect good things to happen, they usually do!
There seems to be a natural cause-and-effect relationship between optimism and success.
Optimism and pessimism are both powerful forces, and each of us must choose which we want to shape our outlook and our expectations.
There is enough good and bad in everyone's life - ample sorrow and happiness, sufficient joy and pain - to find a rational basis for either optimism or pessimism.
We can choose to laugh or cry, bless or curse.
It's our decision: From which perspective do we want to view life?
Will we look up in hope or down in despair?
I believe in the upward look.
I choose to highlight the positive and slip right over the negative.
I am an optimist by choice as much as by nature.
Sure, I know that sorrow exists.
I am in my 70s now, and I've lived through more than one crisis.
But when all is said and done, I find that the good in life far outweighs the bad.
An optimistic attitude is not a luxury; it's a necessity.
The way you look at life will determine how you feel, how you perform, and how well you will get along with other people.
Conversely, negative thoughts, attitudes, and expectations feed on themselves; they become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Pessimism creates a dismal place where no one wants to live.
Years ago, I drove into a service station to get some gas.
It was a beautiful day, and I was feeling great.
As I walked into the station to pay for the gas, the attendant said to me, "How do you feel?"
That seemed like an odd question, but I felt fine and told him so. "
You don't look well," he replied.
This took me completely by surprise.
A little less confidently, I told him that I had never felt better.
Without hesitation, he continued to tell me how bad I looked and that my skin appeared yellow.
By the time I left the service station, I was feeling a little uneasy.
About a block away, I pulled over to the side of the road to look at my face in the mirror.
How did I feel?
Was I jaundiced?
Was everything all right?
By the time I got home, I was beginning to feel a little queasy.
Did I have a bad liver?
Had I picked up some rare disease?
The next time I went into that gas station, feeling fine again, I figured out what had happened.
The place had recently been painted a bright, bilious yellow, and the light reflecting off the walls made everyone inside look as though they had hepatitis!
I wondered how many other folks had reacted the way I did.
I had let one short conversation with a total stranger change my attitude for an entire day.
He told me I looked sick, and before long, I was actually feeling sick.
That single negative observation had a profound effect on the way I felt and acted.
The only thing more powerful than negativism is a positive affirmation, a word of optimism and hope.
One of the things I am most thankful for is the fact that I have grown up in a nation with a grand tradition of optimism.
When a whole culture adopts an upward look, incredible things can be accomplished.
When the world is seen as a hopeful, positive place, people are empowered to attempt and to achieve.
Optimism doesn't need to be naive.
We can be an optimist and still recognize that problems exist and that some of them are not dealt with easily.
But what a difference optimism makes in the attitude of the problem solver!
Optimism diverts our attention away from negativism and channels it into positive, constructive thinking.
When you're an optimist, you're more concerned with problem-solving than with useless carping about issues.
In fact, without optimism, issues as big and ongoing as poverty have no hope of solution.
It takes a dreamer - someone with hopelessly optimistic ideas, great persistence, and unlimited confidence - to tackle a problem that big.
It's your choice.
We chase after it, when it is waiting all about us.
"Are you happy? "
I asked my brother, Ronald, one day. "
Yes.
No.
It depends on what you mean," he said.
" Then tell me," I asked, "when was the last time you think you were happy? "
"April 1967," he said.
It served me right for putting a serious question to someone who has joked his way through life.
But Ronald's answer reminded me that when we think about happiness, we usually think of something extraordinary, a pinnacle of sheer delight - and those pinnacles seem to get rarer the older we get.
For a child, happiness has a magical quality.
I remember making hide-outs in newly-cut hay, playing cops and robbers in the woods, getting a speaking part in the school play.
Of course, kids also experience lows, but their delight at such peaks of pleasure as winning a race or getting a new bike is unreserved.
In the teenage years, the concept of happiness changes.
Suddenly it's conditional on such things as excitement, love, popularity and whether that zit will clear up before prom night.
I can still feel the agony of not being invited to a party that almost everyone else was going to.
But I also recall the ecstasy of being plucked from obscurity at another event to dance with a Jason Smith look-alike.
In adulthood, the things that bring profound joy - birth, love, marriage also - bring responsibility and the risk of loss.
Love may not last, sex isn't always good, loved ones die.
For adults, happiness is complicated.
My dictionary defines happy as "lucky" or "fortunate," but I think a better definition of happiness is "the capacity for enjoyment. "
The more we can enjoy what we have, the happier we are.
It's easy to overlook the pleasure we get from loving and being loved, the company of friends, the freedom to live where we please, and even good health.
I added up my little moments of pleasure yesterday.
First there was sheer bliss when I shut the last lunch-box and had the house to myself.
Then I spent an uninterrupted morning writing, which I love.
When the kids came home, I enjoyed their noise after the quiet of the day.
Later, peace descended again, and my husband and I enjoyed another pleasure - intimacy.
Sometimes just the knowledge that he wants me can bring me joy.
You never know where happiness will turn up next.
When I asked friends what made them happy, some mentioned seemingly insignificant moments. "
I hate shopping," one friend said, "but there's a clerk who always chats and really cheers me up. "
Another friend loves the telephone, "Every time it rings, I know someone is thinking about me. "
I get a thrill from driving.
One day I stopped to let a school bus turn onto a side road.
The driver grinned and gave me the thumbs up sign.
We were two allies in a world of mad motorists.
It made me smile.
We all experience moments like these.
Too few of us register them as happiness.
Psychologists tell us that to be happy we need a blend of enjoyable leisure time and satisfying work.
I doubt that my great-grandmother, who raised 14 children and took in washing, had much of either.
She did have a network of close friends and family, and maybe this was what fulfilled her.
If she was happy with what she had, perhaps it was because she didn't expect life to be very different.
We, on the other hand, with so many choices and such pressure to succeed in every area, have turned happiness into one more thing we "gotta have. "
We're so self-conscious about our "right" to it that it's making us miserable.
So we chase it and equate it with wealth and success, without noticing that the people who have those things aren't necessarily happier.
While happiness may be more complex for us, the solution is the same as ever.
Happiness isn't about what happens to us - it's about how we perceive what happens to us.
It's the knack of finding a positive for every negative, and viewing a setback as a challenge.
It's not wishing for what we don't have, but enjoying what we do possess.
Have you thought about what you want people to say about you after you're gone?
Can you hear the voices saying, "He was a great man. "
or "She really will be missed. "
What else do they say?
One of the strangest phenomena of life is to engage in a work that will last long after death.
Isn't that a lot like investing all your money so that future generations can bare interest on it?
Perhaps, yet if you look deep in your own heart, you'll find something drives you to make this kind of contribution - something drives every human being to find a purpose that lives on after death.
Do you hope to memorialize your name?
Have a name that is whispered with reverent awe?
Do you hope to have your face carved upon 50 ft of granite rock?
Is the answer really that simple?
Is the purpose of lifetime contribution an ego-driven desire for a mortal being to have an immortal name or is it something more?
A child alive today will die tomorrow.
A baby that had the potential to be the next Einstein will die from complications at birth.
The circumstances of life are not set in stone.
We are not all meant to live life through to old age.
We've grown to perceive life as a full cycle with a certain number of years in between.
If all of those years aren't lived out, it's a tragedy.
A tragedy because a human's potential was never realized.
A tragedy because a spark was snuffed out before it ever became a flame.
By virtue of inhabiting a body we accept these risks.
We expose our mortal flesh to the laws of the physical environment around us.
The trade off isn't so bad when you think about it.
The problem comes when we construct mortal fantasies of what life should be like.
When life doesn't conform to our fantasy, we grow upset, frustrated, or depressed.
We are alive; let us live.
We have the ability to experience; let us experience.
We have the ability to learn; let us learn.
The meaning of life can be grasped in a moment.
A moment so brief it often evades our perception.
What meaning stands behind the dramatic unfolding of life?
What single truth can we grasp and hang onto for dear life when all other truths around us seem to fade with time?
These moments are strung together in a series we call events.
These events are strung together in a series we call life.
When we seize the moment and bend it according to our will, a will driven by the spirit deep inside us, then we have discovered the meaning of life, a meaning for us that shall go on long after we depart this Earth.
Each human being is born as something new, something that never existed before.
Each is born with the capacity to win at life.
Each person has a unique way of seeing, hearing, touching, tasting and thinking.
Each has his or her own unique potentials - capabilities and limitations.
Each can be a significant, thinking, aware, and creative being - a productive person, a winner.
The word "winner" and "loser" have many meanings.
When we refer to a person as a winner, we do not mean one who makes someone else lose.
To us, a winner is one who responds authentically by being credible, trustworthy, responsive, and genuine, both as an individual and as a member of a society.
Winners do not dedicate their lives to a concept of what they imagine they should be; rather, they are themselves and as such do not use their energy putting on a performance, maintaining pretence and manipulating others.
They are aware that there is a difference between being loving and acting loving, between being stupid and acting stupid, between being knowledgeable and acting knowledgeable.
Winners do not need to hide behind a mask.
Winners are not afraid to do their own thinking and to use their own knowledge.
They can separate facts from opinions and don't pretend to have all the answers.
They listen to others, evaluate what they say, but come to their own conclusions.
Although winners can admire and respect other people, they are not totally defined, demolished, bound, or awed by them.
Winners do not play "helpless", nor do they play the blaming game.
Instead, they assume responsibility for their own lives.
They don't give others a false authority over them.
Winners are their own bosses and know it.
A winner's timing is right.
Winners respond appropriately to the situation.
Their responses are related to the message sent and preserve the significance, worth, well-being, and dignity of the people involved.
Winners know that for everything there is a season and for every activity a time.
Although winners can freely enjoy themselves, they can also postpone enjoyment, can discipline themselves in the present to enhance their enjoyment in the future.
Winners are not afraid to go after what he wants, but they do so in proper ways.
Winners do not get their security be controlling others.
They do not set themselves up to lose.
A winner cares about the world and its peoples.
A winner is not isolated from the general problems of society, but is concerned, compassionate, and committed to improving the quality of life.
Even in the face of national and international adversity, a winner's self-image is not one of a powerless individual.
A winner works to make the world a better place.
Dear son…
The day that you see me old and I am already weak, have patience and try to understand me…
If I get dirty when eating… if I can not dress…have patience.
Remember the hours I spent teaching it to you.
If, when I speak to you, I repeat the same things thousand and one times… do not interrupt me…listen to me.
When you were small, I had to read to you thousand and one times the same story until you get to sleep…
When I do not want to have a shower, neither shame me nor scold me…
Remember when I had to chase you with thousand excuses I invented, in order that you wanted to bath…
When you see my ignorance on new technologies…give me the necessary time and not look at me with your mocking smile…
I taught you how to do so many things… to eat good, to dress well… to confront life…
When at some moment I lose the memory or the thread of our conversation… let me have the necessary time to remember… and if I cannot do it, do not become nervous… as the most important thing is not my conversation but surely to be with you and to have you listening to me…
If ever I do not want to eat, do not force me.
I know well when I need to and when not.
When my tired legs do not allow me walk… give me your hand… the same way I did when you gave your first steps.
And when some day I say to you that I do not want to live any more… that I want to die… do not get angry… some day you will understand… try to understand that my age is not lived but survived.
Some day you will discover that, despite my mistakes, I always wanted the best thing for you and that I tried to prepare the way for you.
You must not feel sad, angry or impotent for seeing me near you.
You must be next to me, try to understand me and to help me as I did it when you started living.
Help me to walk… help me to end my way with love and patience.
I will pay you by a smile and by the immense love I have had always for you.
I love you son…
Your father
" Can I see my baby?"
the happy new mother asked.
When the bundle was nestled in her arms and she moved the fold of cloth to look upon his tiny face, she gasped.
The doctor turned quickly and looked out the tall hospital window.
The baby had been born without ears.
Time proved that the baby's hearing was perfect.
It was only his appearance that was marred.
When he rushed home from school one day and flung himself into his mother's arms, she sighed, knowing that his life was to be a succession of heartbreaks.
He blurted out the tragedy, "A boy, a big boy…called me a freak. "
He grew up, handsome for his misfortune.
A favorite with his fellow students, he might have been class president, but for that.
He developed a gift, a talent for literature and music.
The boy's father had a session with the family physician, "Could nothing be done? "
" I believe I could graft on a pair of outer ears, if they could be gotten. "
the doctor declared.
They searched for a person who would make such a great sacrifice for the young man.
Two years went by.
One day, his father said to the son, "You're going to the hospital, son.
Mother and I have someone who will donate the ears you need.
But the identity of the donor is a secret. "
The operation was a brilliant success, and a new person emerged.
His talents blossomed into genius.
School and college became a series of triumphs.
He married and led the diplomatic service.
He would ask his father: "Who gave me the ears?
Who gave me so much?
I could never do enough for him or her. "
" I do not believe you could," said the father, "but the agreement was that you are not to know…not yet. "
The years kept their profound secret, but the day did come.
He stood with his father over his mother's casket.
Slowly, tenderly, the father stretched forth his hand and raised the thick, reddish-brown hair to reveal that the mother had no outer ears.
" Mother said she was glad she never let her hair cut," his father whispered gently, "and nobody ever thought mother less beautiful, did they? "
Years of storms had taken their toll on the old windmill.
Its wheel, rusted and fallen, lay silently in the lush bluegrass.
Its once animated silhouette was now a tall motionless steeple in the twilight sun.
I hadn't walked across our old farm in fifteen years.
Yet the sensations came flooding back.
I could smell the freshness of new mown alfalfa.
I could feel the ping of the ice-cold summer rain, and the sun's sudden warmth on my wet shoulders when it reappeared after a brisk July thunderstorm.
Rain or shine, I used to walk this path each day to see Grace.
She always made me smile, even after Sis and I had just had a big squabble.
I would help Grace with her chores.
Then we would visit over a generous helping of her delicious homemade chocolate cookies and ice cream.
Being confined to a wheel chair didn't stop Grace from being a fabulous cook.
Grace gave me two of the greatest gifts I've ever received.
First, she taught me how to read.
She also taught me that when I forgave Sis for our squabbles, it meant I wouldn't keep feeling like a victim.
Instead, I would feel sunny.
Mr. Norton, the local banker, tried to foreclose on Grace's house and land after her husband passed away.
Thanks to Pa and Uncle Tony, Grace could keep everything.
Pa said that it was the least he could do for someone talented enough to teach me to read!
Soon folks were coming from miles around to buy Grace's homemade cakes, pies, breads, cookies, cider, and ice cream.
Mark, the grocery store man, came each week to stock his shelves and bring Grace supplies.
Grace even had me take a big apple pie to Mr. Norton who became one of her best customers and friends.
That's just how Grace was.
She could turn anyone into a friend!
Grace always said, "Dear, keep walking in sunshine!"
No matter how terrible my day started, I always felt sunny walking home from Grace's house - even beneath the winter starlight.
I arrived at Grace's house today just after sunset.
An ambulance had stopped a few feet from her door, its red lights flashing.
When I ran into the old house, Grace recognized me right away.
She smiled at me with her unforgettable twinkling blue eyes.
She was almost out of breath when she reached out and softly touched my arm.
Her last words to me were "Dear, keep walking in sunshine! "
I'm sure that Grace is walking in the brightest sunshine she's ever seen.
And, I'm sure that she heard every word I read at her memorial service.
I chose a beautiful verse by Leo Buscaglia.
It's one that Grace taught me to read many years ago…
" Love can never grow old.
Locks may lose their brown and gold.
Cheeks may fade and hollow grow.
But the hearts that love will know, never winter's frost and chill, summer's warmth is in them still. "
I first fell in love with my husband when we sat and talked in front of the (ceiling-to-floor) windows with the long, white curtains in the living room of my old apartment, drinking cups of scalding, black coffee.
We would just sit and talk - sometimes until sunrise.
I was so completely thrilled to have finally found that one special person and our wedding day was the happiest day of my life.
However, it was not long after our honeymoon when my husband climbed into the tomb called "the office" and wrapped his mind in a shroud of paperwork and buried himself in clients, and I said nothing for fear of turning into a nagging wife.
It seemed as if overnight an invisible wall had been erected between us.
When our daughter, Daisy, was born, she quickly became the center of my world.
I watched her grow from infant to toddler, and I no longer seemed to care that my husband was getting busier and spending less time at home.
Somewhere between his work schedule and our home and young daughter, we were losing touch with each other.
That invisible wall was now being cemented by the mortar of indifference.
Daisy went off to preschool and I returned to college to finish my degree, and I tried to find myself in the courses I took.
I complained with all the other young women on campus about men who are insensitive.
Sometimes late at night I cried and begged the whispering darkness to tell me who I really was, and my husband lay besides snoring like a hibernating bear unaware of my winter.
Then tragedy struck our lives, when my husband's younger brother was killed on September 11, 2001, along with thousands of other innocent people.
He made it out okay and spoke to his wife to say he was going back in to help those that were still trapped.
He was identified only by the engraving on the inside of his wedding band.
Attending his brother's memorial service was an eye-opening experience for both of us.
For the first time, we saw our own marriage was almost like my in-laws.
At the tragic death of the youngest son they could not reach out to console one another.
It seemed as if somewhere between the oldest son's first tooth and the youngest son's graduation they had lost each other.
Their wedding day photograph of the young, happy, smiling couple on the mantle of their fireplace was almost mocking those two minds that no longer touched.
They were living with such an invisible wall between them that the heaviest battering with the strongest artillery would not penetrate.
When love dies, it is not in a moment of angry battle or when fiery bodies lose their heat, it lies broken and panting and exhausted at the bottom of a wall it cannot penetrate.
Recently one night, my husband told of his fear of dying.
Until then he had been afraid to expose his naked souls.
I spoke of trying to find myself in the writings in my journal.
It seemed as if each of us had been hiding our soul-searching from the other.
We are slowly working toward building a bridge not a wall, so that when we reach out to each other, we do not find a barrier we cannot penetrate and recoil from the coldness of the stone or retreat from the stranger on the other side.
They have been married for two years.
He loves literature and often posts his work on the net, but nobody ever reads them.
He is also into photography and he handles their wedding photos.
He loves her very much, likewise with her.
She has a quick temper and always bullies him.
He is a gentleman and always gives in to her.
Today, she's being willful again.
Her: "Why can't you be the photographer for my friend's wedding?
She promised she'd pay. "
Him: "I don't have time that day. "
Her: "Humph! "
Him: "Huh? "
Her: "Don't have time?
Write fewer of those novels, and you will have all the time you need. "
Him: "I… someone will definitely recognize my work some day. "
Her: "Humph!
I don't care.
You'll have to do it for her! "
Him: "No. "
Her: "Just this time? "
Him: "No. "
Negotiation's broken.
So, she gives the final warning: "Give me a Yes within three days, or else…"
The first day, she "withholds" the kitchen, bathroom, computer, refrigerator, television, hi-fi…except the double bed, to show her "benevolence. "
Of course, she has to sleep on it too.
He doesn't mind, as he still has some cash in his pockets.
The second day, she conducts a raid and removes everything from his pockets and warns, "Seek any external help, and you bear the consequences. "
He's nervous now.
That night, on the bed, he begs for mercy, hoping that she'll end this state.
She doesn't give a damn. "
No way am I giving in, whatever he says.
Until he agrees. "
The third day, night.
On the bed.
He's lying on the bed, looking to one side.
She's lying on the bed, looking to the other side.
Him: "We need to talk. "
Her: "Unless it's about the wedding, or forget it. "
Him: "It's something very important. "
She remains silent.
Him: "Let's get a divorce. "
She doesn't believe her ears.
Him: "I have known a girl. "
She's totally angry, and wants to hit him.
But she holds it down, wanting to let him finish.
But her eyes already feel wet.
He takes a photo out from his chest.
Probably from his undershirt pocket, that's the only place she didn't go through yesterday.
How careless.
Him: "She's a nice girl. "
Her tears fall.
Him: "She has a good personality too. "
She's heartbroken because he puts a photo of some other girl close to his heart.
Him: "She says that she'll support me fully in my pursuit for literature after we get married. "
She's very jealous because she said the same thing in the past.
Him: "She loves me truly. "
She wishes to sit up and scream at him, "Don't I? "
Him: "So, I think she won't force me to do something that I don't want to do. "
She's thinking, but the rage won't subside.
Him: "Want to take a look at the photo I took for her? "
Her: "…! "
He brings the photo before her eyes.
She's in a total rage, hits his hand away and leaves a burning slap on his face.
He sighs.
She cries.
He puts the photo back to his pocket.
She pulls her hand back under the blanket.
He turns off the light, and sleeps.
She turns on the light, and sits up.
He's asleep.
She loses sleep.
She regrets treating him the way she treated him.
She cries again, and thinks about a lot of things.
She wants to wake him up.
She wants to have an intimate talk with him.
She doesn't want to push him anymore.
She stares at his chest.
She wants to see how the girl looks.
She slips the photo out.
She wants to cry and she wants to laugh.
It's a nicely taken photo.
A photo he took for her.
She bends down, and kisses him on his cheek.
He smiles.
He was just pretending to be asleep.
" You learn to love, not by finding a perfect person, but by learning to see an imperfect person perfectly. "
After 21 years of marriage, my wife wanted me to take another woman out to dinner and a movie.
She said, "I love you, but I know this other woman loves you and would love to spend some time with you. "
The other woman that my wife wanted me to visit was my mother, who had been a widow for 19 years, but the demands of my work and my 3 children had made it possible to visit her only occasionally.
That night I called to invite her to go out for dinner and a movie.
" What's wrong, are you well? "
she asked.
My mother is the type of woman who suspects that a late night call or surprise invitation is a sign of bad news.
" I thought that it would be pleasant to spend some time with you. "
I responded, "Just the two of us. "
She thought about it for a moment, and then said, "I would like that very much. "
That Friday after work, as I drove over to pick her up, I was a bit nervous.
When I arrived at her house, I noticed that she, too, seemed to be nervous about our date.
She waited in the door with her coat on.
She had curled her hair and was wearing the dress that she had worn to celebrate her last wedding anniversary.
She smiled from a face that was as radiant as an Angel's. "
I told my friends that I was going to go out with my son, and they were impressed. "
She said, as she got into the car, "they can't wait to hear about our meeting. "
We went to a restaurant that, although not elegant, was very nice and cozy.
My mother took my arm as if she were the First Lady.
After we sat down, I had to read the menu.
Her eyes could only read large print.
Half way through the entries, I lifted my eyes and saw Mom sitting there staring at me.
A nostalgic smile was on her lips. "
It was I who used to have to read the menu when you were small. "
She said. "
Then it's time that you relax and let me return the favor," I responded.
During the dinner, we had an agreeable conversation - nothing extraordinary but catching up on recent events of each other's life.
We talked so much that we missed the movie.
As we arrived at her house later, she said, "I'll go out with you again, but only if you let me invite you. "
I agreed.
" How was your dinner date? "
Asked my wife when I got home.
" Very nice.
Much more so than I could have imagined," I answered.
A few days later, my mother died of a massive heart attack.
It happened so suddenly that I didn't have a chance to do anything for her.
Some time later, I received an envelope with a copy of a restaurant receipt from the same place where mother and I had dined.
An attached note said, "I paid this bill in advance.
I wasn't sure that I could be there, but nevertheless I paid for two plates - one for you and the other for your wife.
You will never know what that night meant for me. "
" I love you, son. "
At that moment, I understood the importance of saying in time, "I love you" and to give our love ones the time that they deserve.
Nothing in life is more important than your family.
Give them the time they deserve, because these things cannot be put off till "some other time".
There was once a lonely girl who longed so much for love.
One day while she was walking in the woods, she found two starving songbirds.
She took them home and put them in a small cage.
She cared for them with love and the birds grew strong.
Every morning they greeted her with a wonderful song.
The girl felt great love for the birds.
One day the girl left the door to the cage open.
The larger and stronger of the two birds flew from the cage.
The girl was so frightened that he would fly away.
As he flew close, she grasped him wildly.
Her heart felt glad at her success in capturing him.
Suddenly she felt the bird go limp.
She opened her hand and stared in horror at the dead bird.
Her desperate love had killed him.
She noticed the other bird moving back and forth on the edge of the cage.
She could feel his great need for freedom.
He needed to soar into the clear, blue sky.
She lifted him from the cage and tossed him softly into the air.
The bird circled once, twice, three times.
The girl watched delightedly at the bird's enjoyment.
Her heart was no longer concerned with her loss.
She wanted the bird to be happy.
Suddenly the bird flew closer and landed softly on her shoulder.
It sang the sweetest melody that she had ever heard.
The fastest way to lose love is to hold on it too tight, and the best way to keep love is to give it WINGS!
Love is a telephone which always keeps silent when you are longing for a call, but rings when you are not ready for it.
As a result, we often miss the sweetness from the other end.
Love is a telephone which is seldom program-controlled or directly dialed.
You cannot get an immediate answer by a mere "Hello", let alone go deep into your lover's heart by one call.
Usually it has to be relayed by an operator, and you have to be patient in waiting.
Destiny is the operator of this phone, who is always irresponsible and fond of playing practical jokes to which she may make you a lifelong victim intentionally or unintentionally.
Love is a telephone which is always busy.
When you are ready to devote yourself to or even ready to die for love, you only find, to your disappointment, the line is already occupied by someone else, and you are greeted only by a busy line.
This is an eternal regret handed down from generation and you are only one of those who languish for flowers of love.
Love is a telephone which is sometimes so sensitive that you are put through by a single dial and responded to as soon as you say "Hello".
But, more often than not, you only hang it up and turn away sadly just because of its lack of challenge and effort.
Once you realize your mistake, no one is available at the other end.
Love is a telephone, but it is difficult to seize the right time for dialing, and you will let the opportunity slip if your call is either too early or too late.
Love is a telephone which is not always associated with happiness.
Honeyed words are transmitted by sound waves, but when the lovers are brought together, the phone serves no purpose.
No wonder that many lovers observe that marriage is the doom of love.
Love is a telephone which, when you use it for the first time, makes you so nervous and excited that you either hold the receiver upside down or dial the wrong number.
By the time you've calmed down, you will be at a loss to whom you should make the call.
Love is a telephone which often has crossed lines.
And this usually happens to you unexpectedly.
Your line will either cross or be crossed.
Both cases are referred to as "triangles".
Fortunately, all such occurrences are transient.
Red roses were her favorites, her name was also Rose.
And every year her husband sent them, tied with pretty bows.
The year he died, the roses were delivered to her door.
The card said, "Be my Valentine", like all the years before.
Each year he sent her roses, and the note would always say, "I love you even more this year than last year on this day." "
My love for you will always grow, with every passing year. "
She knew this was the last time that the roses would appear.
She thought, he ordered roses in advance before this day.
Her loving husband did not know that he would pass away.
He always liked to do things early, way before the time.
Then, if he got too busy, everything would work out fine.
She trimmed the stems, and placed them in a very special vase.
Then, sat the vase beside the portrait of his smiling face, she would sit for hours in her husband's favorite chair, while staring at his picture, and the roses sitting there.
A year went by, and it was hard to live without her mate, with loneliness and solitude, that had become her fate.
Then, the very hour, as on Valentines before, the doorbell rang, and there were roses, sitting by her door.
She brought the roses in, and then just looked at them in shock.
Then, she went to get the telephone to call the florist shop, the owner answered and she asked him if he would explain, why would someone do this to her, causing her such pain? "
I know your husband passed away, more than a year ago," the owner said, "I knew you'd call and you would want to know.
The flowers you received today were paid for in advance.
Your husband always planned ahead, he left nothing to change.
There is a standing order that I have on file down here, and he has paid, well in advance, you'll get them every year.
There is also another thing that I think you should know.
He wrote a special little card... he did it years ago.
Then, should ever I find out that he's no longer here, that's the card. . .
that should be sent to you the following year. "
She thanked him and hung up the phone, her tears now flowing hard.
Her fingers shaked as she slowly reached to get the card... Inside the card, she saw that he had written her a note.
Then, as she stared in total silence, this is what he wrote… "Hello, my love , I know it's been a year since I've been gone, I hope it hasn't been too hard for you to overcome.
I know it must be lonely, and the pain is very real.
For if it were the other way, I know how I would feel.
The love we shared made everything so beautiful in life.
I loved you more than words can say, you were the perfect wife.
You were my friend and lover, you fulfilled my every need.
I know it's only been a year, but please try not to grieve.
I want you to be happy, even when you shed your tears.
That is why the roses will be sent to you for years.
When you get these roses, think of all the happiness that we had together and how both of us were blessed.
I have always loved you and I know I always will.
But, my love, you must go on, you have some living still.
Please… try to find happiness, while living out your days.
I know it is not easy, but I hope you find some ways.
The roses will come every year and they will only stop when your door is not answered.
The florist will come five times that day, in case you have gone out.
But after his last visit, he will know without a doubt to take the roses to the place where I've instructed him, and place the roses where we are, together once again. "
Freda Bright says: "Only in opera do people die for love. "
It's true.
You really can't love somebody to death.
I've known people to die from no love, but I've never known anyone to be loved to death.
We just can't love one another enough.
A heart-warming story tells of a woman who finally decided to ask her boss for a raise in salary.
All day she felt nervous and apprehensive.
Late in the afternoon she summoned the courage to approach her employer.
To her delight, the boss agreed to a raise.
The woman arrived home that evening to see a beautiful table set with their best dishes.
Candles were softly glowing.
Her husband had come home early and prepared a festive meal.
She wondered if someone from the office had tipped him off.
Or… did he just somehow know that she would not get turned down?
She found him in the kitchen and told him the good news.
They embraced and kissed, then sat down to the wonderful meal.
Next to her plate the woman found a beautifully lettered note.
It read: "Congratulations, darling!
I knew you'd get the raise!
These things will tell you how much I love you. "
Following the supper, her husband went into the kitchen to clean up.
She noticed that a second card had fallen from his pocket.
Picking it up from the floor, she read: "Don't worry about not getting the raise!
You deserve it anyway!
These things will tell you how much I love you. "
Someone has said that the measure of love is when you love without measure.
What this man feels for his spouse is total acceptance and love, whether she succeeds or fails.
His love celebrates her victories and soothes her wounds.
He stands with her, no matter what life throws in their direction.
He may say that he loves her to death.
But he doesn't.
He loves her to LIFE.
For his love nourishes her life like nothing else can.
Upon receiving the Noble Peace Prize, Mother Teresa said: "What can you do to promote the world peace?
Go home and love your family. "
And love your friends.
Love them without measure.
Love them to LIFE.
O Who will walk a mile with me
Along life's merry way?
A comrade blithe and full of glee,
Who dares to laugh out loud and free
And let his frolic fancy play,
Like a happy child, through the flowers gay
That fill the field and fringe the way
Where he walks a mile with me.
And who will walk a mile with me
Along life's weary way?
A friend whose heart has eyes to see
The stars shine out o'er the darkening lea,
And the quiet rest at the end o' the day -
A friend who knows, and dares to say,
The brave sweet words that cheer the way
Where he walks a mile with me.
With such a comrade, such a friend,
I fain would walk till journey's end,
Through summer sunshine, winter rain,
And then?
Farewell, we shall meet again!
On the seashore of endless worlds children meet.
The infinite sky is motionless overhead and the restless water is boisterous.
On the seashore of endless worlds the children meet with shouts and dances.
They build their houses with sand, and they play with empty shells.
With withered leaves they weave their boats and smilingly float them on the vast deep.
Children have their play on the seashore of worlds.
They know not how to swim, they know not how to cast nets.
Pearl-fishers dive for pearls, merchants sail in their ships, while children gather pebbles and scatter them again.
They seek not for hidden treasures, they know not how to cast nets.
The sea surges up with laughter, and pale gleams the smile of the sea-beach.
Death-dealing waves sing meaningless ballads to the children, even like a mother while rocking her baby's cradle.
The sea plays with children, and pale gleams the smile of the sea beach.
On the seashore of endless worlds children meet.
Tempest roams in the pathless sky, ships are wrecked in the trackless water, death is abroad and children play.
On the seashore of endless worlds is the great meeting of children.
Let the old snow be covered with the new:
The trampled snow, so soiled, and stained, and sodden.
Let it be hidden wholly from our view
By pure white flakes, all trackless and untrodden.
When Winter dies, low at the sweet Spring's feet
Let him be mantled in a clean, white sheet.
Let the old life be covered by the new:
The old past life so full of sad mistakes,
Let it be wholly hidden from the view
By deeds as white and silent as snow-flakes.
Ere this earth life melts in the eternal Spring
Let the white mantle of repentance fling
Soft drapery about it, fold on fold,
Even as the new snow covers up the old.
Hands cling to hands and eyes linger on eyes;
thus begins the record of our hearts.
It is the moonlight night of March;
the sweet smell of henna is in the air;
my flute lies on the earth neglected and your garland of flowers is unfinished.
This love between you and me is simple as a song.
Your veil of the saffron color makes my eyes drunk.
The jasmine wreath that you wove me thrills to my heart like praise.
It is a game of giving and withholding, revealing and screening again;
Some smiles and some little shyness, and some sweet useless struggles.
This love between you and me is simple as a song.
Sea waves are green and wet,
But up from where they die,
Rise others vaster yet,
And those are brown and dry.
They are the sea made land
To come at the fisher town,
And bury in solid sand
The men she could not drown.
She may know cove and cape,
But she does not know mankind
If by any change of shape,
She hopes to cut off mind.
Men left her a ship to sink:
They can leave her a hut as well;
And be but more free to think
For the one more cast-off shell.
Thou still unravished bride of quietness,
Thou foster-child of silence and slow time,
Sylvan historian, who canst thus express
A flowery tale more sweetly than our rhyme!
What leaf-fringed legend haunts about thy shape
Of deities or mortals, or of both,
In Tempe or the dales of Arcady?
What men or gods are these?
What maidens loath?
What mad pursuit?
What struggle to escape?
What pipes and timbrels?
What wild ecstasy?
Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard
Are sweeter; therefore, ye soft pipes, play on;
Not to the sensual ear, but, more endeared,
Pipe to the spirit ditties of no tone.
Fair youth, beneath the trees, thou canst not leave
Thy song, nor ever can those trees be bare;
Bold lover, never, never canst thou kiss,
Though winning near the goal - yet, do not grieve;
She cannot fade, though thou hast not thy bliss,
Forever wilt thou love, and she be fair!
Ah, happy, happy boughs!
That cannot shed
Your leaves, nor ever bid the spring adieu;
And, happy melodist, unwearied,
Forever piping songs forever new;
More happy love!
More happy, happy love!
Forever warm and still to be enjoyed,
Forever panting, and forever young;
All breathing human passion far above,
That leaves a heart high-sorrowful and cloyed,
A burning forehead, and a parching tongue.
Who are these coming to the sacrifice?
To what green altar, O mysterious priest,
Lead'st thou that heifer lowing at the skies,
And all her silken flanks with garlands dressed?
What little town by river or sea-shore,
Or mountain-built with peaceful citadel,
Is emptied of this folk, this pious morn?
And, little town, thy streets for evermore
Will silent be; and not a soul to tell
Why thou art desolate, can e'er return.
O Attic shape!
Fair attitude!
With brede
Of marble men and maidens overwrought,
With forest branches and the trodden weed -
Thou, silent form, dost tease us out of thought
As doth eternity.
Cold Pastoral!
When old age shall this generation waste,
Thou shalt remain, in midst of other woe
Than ours, a friend to man, to whom thou say'st,
" Beauty is truth, truth beauty, " - that is all
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.
Swallows may have gone, but there is a time of return; willow trees may have died back, but there is a time of regreening; peach blossoms may have fallen, but they will bloom again.
Now, you the wise, tell me, why should our days leave us, never to return? -
If they had been stolen by someone, who could it be?
Where could he hide them?
It they had made the escape themselves, then where could they stay at the moment?
I don't know how many days I have been given to spend, but I do feel my hands are getting empty.
Taking stock silently, I find that more than eight thousand days have already slid away from me.
Like a drop of water from the point of a needle disappearing into the ocean, my days are dripping into the stream of time, soundless, traceless.
Already sweat is starting on my forehead, and tears welling up in my eyes.
Those that have gone have gone for good, those to come keep coming; yet in between, how swift is the shift, in such a rush?
When I get up in the morning, the slanting sun marks its presence in my small room in two or three oblongs.
The sun has feet, look, he is treading on, lightly and furtively; and I am caught, blankly, in his revolution.
Thus - the day flows away through the sink when I wash my hands, wears off in the bowl when I eat my meal, and passes away before my day-dreaming gaze as I reflect in silence.
I can feel his haste now, so I reach out my hands to hold him back, but he keeps flowing past my withholding hands.
In the evening, as I lie in bed, he strides over my body, glides past my feet, in his agile way.
The moment I open my eyes and meet the sun again, one whole day has gone.
I bury my face in my hands and heave a sigh.
But the new day begins to flash past in the sigh.
What can I do, in this bustling world, with my days flying in their escape?
Nothing but to hesitate, to rush.
What have I been doing in that eight-thousand-day rush, apart from hesitating?
Those bygone days have been dispersed as smoke by a light wind, or evaporated as mist by the morning sun.
What traces have I left behind me?
Have I ever left behind any gossamer traces at all?
I have come to the world, stark naked; am I to go back, in a blink, in the same stark nakedness?
It is not fair though: why should I have made such a trip for nothing!
You the wise, tell me, why should our days leave us, never to return?
This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted: and Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself, soon went away.
But before she had been three minutes in her own room, her mother followed her.
" My dearest child," she cried, "I can think of nothing else!
Ten thousand a year, and very likely more! '
tis as good as a Lord!
And a special licence.
You must and shall be married by a special licence.
But my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of, that I may have it tomorrow. "
This was a sad omen of what her mother's behaviour to the gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations' consent, there was still something to be wished for.
But the morrow passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood in such awe of her intended son-in-law that she ventured not to speak to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her deference for his opinion.
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising every hour in his esteem.
" I admire all my three sons-in-law highly," said he. "
Wickham, perhaps, is my favourite; but I think I shall like your husband quite as well as Jane's. "
Elizabeth's spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr. Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. "
How could you begin?"
said she. "
I can comprehend your going on charmingly, when you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first place? "
" I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which laid the foundation.
It is too long ago.
I was in the middle before I knew that I had begun. "
" My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners - my behaviour to you was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not.
Now be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence? "
" For the liveliness of your mind, I did. "
" You may as well call it impertinence at once.
It was very little less.
The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious attention.
You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking and looking, and thinking for your approbation alone.
I roused, and interested you, because I was so unlike them.
Had you not been really amiable, you would have hated me for it; but in spite of the pains you took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and in your heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously courted you.
There - I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly reasonable.
To be sure, you knew no actual good of me - but nobody thinks of that when they fall in love. "
"Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane, while she was ill at Netherfield? "
" Dearest Jane!
Who could have done less for her?
But make a virtue of it by all means.
My good qualities are under your protection, and you are to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may be; and I shall begin directly by asking you what made you so unwilling to come to the point at last.
What made you so shy of me, when you first called, and afterwards dined here?
Why, especially, when you called, did you look as if you did not care about me? "
" Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement. "
" But I was embarrassed. "
" And so was I."
" You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner. "
" A man who had felt less, might. "
" How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that I should be so reasonable as to admit it!
But I wonder how long you would have gone on, if you had been left to yourself.
I wonder when you would have spoken, if I had not asked you!
My resolution of thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect.
Too much, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort springs from a breach of promise?
For I ought not to have mentioned the subject.
This will never do. "
" You need not distress yourself.
The moral will be perfectly fair.
Lady Catherine's unjustifiable endeavors to separate us were the means of removing all my doubts.
I am not indebted for my present happiness to your eager desire of expressing your gratitude.
I was not in a humour to wait for any opening of yours.
My aunt's intelligence had given me hope, and I was determined at once to know everything. "
" Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy, for she loves to be of use.
But tell me, what did you come down to Netherfield for?
Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed?
Or had you intended any more serious consequence? "
" My real purpose was to see you, and to judge, if I could, whether I might ever hope to make you love me.
My avowed one, or what I avowed to myself, was to see whether your sister were still partial to Bingley, and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made. "
" Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine, what is to befall her? "
" I am more likely to want more time than courage, Elizabeth.
But it ought to be done, and if you will give me a sheet of paper, it shall be done directly. "
" And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you and admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did.
But I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected. "
You took me in your arms.
Again I stayed with you for the whole of one glorious night.
But even then you did not recognize me.
While I thrilled to your caresses, it was plain to me that your passion knew no difference between a loving mistress and a meretrix, that your spendthrift affections were wholly concentrated in their own expression.
To me, the stranger picked up at a dancing-hall, you were at once affectionate and courteous.
You would not treat me lightly, and yet you were full of an enthralling ardour.
Dizzy with the old happiness, I was again aware of the two-sidedness of your nature, of that strange mingling of intellectual passion with sensual, which had already enslaved me to you in my childhood.
In no other man have I ever known such complete surrender to the sweetness of the moment.
No other has for the time being given himself so utterly as did you who, when the hour was past, were to relapse into an interminable and almost inhuman forgetfulness.
But I, too, forgot myself.
Who was I, lying in the darkness beside you?
Was I the impassioned child of former days; was I the mother of your son; was I a stranger?
Everything in this wonderful night was at one and the same time entrancingly familiar and entrancingly new.
I prayed that the joy might last forever.
But morning came.
It was late when we rose, and you asked me to stay to breakfast.
Over the tea, which an unseen hand had discreetly served in the dining-room, we talked quietly.
As of old, you displayed a cordial frankness; and, as of old, there were no tactless questions, there was no curiosity about myself.
You did not ask my name, nor where I lived.
To you I was, as before, a casual adventure, a nameless woman, an ardent hour which leaves no trace when it is over.
You told me that you were about to start on a long journey, that you were going to spend two or three months in Northern Africa.
The words broke in upon my happiness like a knell: "Past, past, past and forgotten! "
I longed to throw myself at your feet, crying, "Take me with you, that you may at length come to know me, at length after all these years! "
But I was timid, cowardly, slavish, weak.
All I could say was, "What a pity. "
You looked at me with a smile, "Are you really sorry? "
For a moment I was as if frenzied.
I stood up and looked at you fixedly.
Then I said, "The man I love has always gone on a journey. "
I looked you straight in the eyes. "
Now, now," I thought, "now he will recognize me! "
You only smiled, and said consolingly, "One comes back after a time. "
I answered, "Yes, one comes back, but one has forgotten by then. "
I must have spoken with strong feeling, for my tone moved you.
You, too, rose, and looked at me wonderingly and tenderly.
You put your hands on my shoulders, "Good things are not forgotten, and I shall not forget you. "
Your eyes studied me attentively, as if you wished to form an enduring image of me in your mind.
When I felt this penetrating glance, this exploration of my whole being, I could not but fancy that the spell of your blindness would at last be broken. "
He will recognize me!
He will recognize me!"
My soul trembled with expectation.
But you did not recognize me.
No, you did not recognize me.
Never had I been more of a stranger to you than I was at that moment, for had it been otherwise you could not possibly have done what you did a few minutes later.
You had kissed me again, had kissed me passionately.
My hair had been ruffled, and I had to tidy it once more.
Standing at the glass, I saw in it - and as I saw, I was overcome with shame and horror - that you were surreptitiously slipping a couple of banknotes into my muff.
I could hardly refrain from crying out; I could hardly refrain from slapping your face.
You were paying me for the night I had spent with you, me who had loved you since childhood, me the mother of your son.
To you I was only a prostitute picked up at a dancing-hall.
It was not enough that you should forget me; you had to pay me, and to debase me by doing so.
I hastily gathered up my belongings, that I might escape as quickly as possible; the pain was too great.
I looked round for my hat.
There it was, on the writing-table, beside the vase with the white roses, my roses.
I had an irresistible desire to make a last effort to awaken your memory. "
Will you give me one of your white roses?" "
Of course," you answered, lifting them all out of the vase. "
But perhaps they were given you by a woman, a woman who loves you?" "
Maybe," you replied, "I don't know.
They were a present, but I don't know who sent them ; that's why I'm so fond of them. "
I looked at you intently: "Perhaps they were sent to you by a woman whom you have forgotten! "
You were surprised.
I looked at you yet more intently. "
Recognize me, only recognize me at last! "
was the clamour of my eyes.
But your smile, though cordial, had no recognition in it.
You kissed me yet again, but you did not recognize me.
I hurried away, for my eyes were filling with tears, and I did not want you to see.
In the entry, as I precipitated myself from the room, I almost cannoned into John, your servant.
Embarrassed but zealous, he got out of my way, and opened the front door for me.
Then, in this fugitive instant, as I looked at him through my tears, a light suddenly flooded the old man's face.
In this fugitive instant, I tell you, he recognized me, the man who had never seen me since my childhood.
I was so grateful, that I could have kneeled before him and kissed his hands.
I tore from my muff the banknotes with which you had scourged me, and thrust them upon him.
He glanced at me in alarm - for in this instant I think he understood more of me than you have understood in your whole life.
Everyone, everyone, has been eager to spoil me; everyone has loaded me with kindness.
But you, only you, forgot me.
You, only you, never recognized me.
In the late summer of that year we lived in a house in a village that looked across the river and the plain to the mountains.
In the bed of the river there were pebbles and boulders, dry and white in the sun, and the water was clear and swiftly moving and blue in the channels.
Troops went by the house and down the road and the dust they raised powdered the leaves of the trees.
The trunks of the trees too were dusty and the leaves fell early that year and we saw the troops marching along the road and the dust rising and leaves, stirred by the breeze, falling and the soldiers marching and afterward the road bare and white except for the leaves.
The plain was rich with crops; there were many orchards of fruit trees and beyond the plain the mountains were brown and bare.
There was fighting in the mountains and at night we could see the flashes from the artillery.
In the dark it was like summer lightning, but the nights were cool and there was not the feeling of a storm coming.
Sometimes in the dark we heard the troops marching under the window and guns going past pulled by motor-tractors.
There was much traffic at night and many mules on the roads with boxes of ammunition on each side of their pack-saddles and gray motor-trucks that carried men, and other trucks with loads covered with canvas that moved slower in the traffic.
There were big guns too that passed in the day drawn by tractors, the long barrels of the guns covered with green branches and green leafy branches and vines laid over the tractors.
To the north we could look across a valley and see forest of chestnut trees and behind it another mountain on this side of the river.
There was fighting for that mountain too, but it was not successful, and in the fall when the rains came the leaves all fell from the chestnut trees and the branches were bare and the trunks black with rain.
The vineyards were thin and bare-branched too and all the country wet and brown and dead with the autumn.
There were mists over the river and clouds on the mountain and trucks splashed mud on the road and the troops were muddy and wet in their capes; their rifles were wet and under their capes the two leather cartridge-boxes on the front of belts, gray leather boxes heavy with the packs of clips of thin, long 6.5mm.
cartridges, bulged forward under the capes so that the men, passing on the road, marched as though they were six months gone with child.
I wish I could take a quiet corner in the heart of my baby's very own world.
I know it has stars that talk to him, and a sky that stoops down to his face to amuse him with its silly clouds and rainbows.
Those who make believe to be dumb, and look as if they never could move, come creeping to his window with their stories and with trays crowded with bright toys.
I wish I could travel by the road that crosses baby's mind, and out beyond all bounds;
Where messengers run errands for no cause between the kingdoms of kings of no history;
Where Reason makes kites of her laws and flies them, and Truth sets Fact free from its fetters.
He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf Stream and he had gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish.
In the first forty days a boy had been with him.
But after forty days without a fish the boy's parents had told him that the old man was now definitely and finally salao, which is the worst form of unlucky, and the boy had gone at their orders in another boat which caught three good fish the first week.
It made the boy sad to see the old man come in each day with his skiff empty and he always went down to help him carry either the coiled lines or the gaff and harpoon and the sail that was furled around the mast.
The sail was patched with flour sacks and, furled, it looked like the flag of permanent defeat.
The old man was thin and gaunt with deep wrinkles in the back of his neck.
The brown blotches of the benevolent skin cancer the sun brings from its reflection on the tropic sea were on his cheeks.
The blotches ran well down the sides of his face and his hands had the deep-creased scars from handling heavy fish on the cords.
But none of these scars were fresh.
They were as old as erosions in a fishless desert.
Everything about him was old except his eyes and they were the same color as the sea and were cheerful and undefeated.
"Santiago," the boy said to him as they climbed the bank from where the skiff was hauled up. "
I could go with you again.
We've made some money. "
The old man had taught the boy to fish and the boy loved him.
" No," the old man said. "
You're with a lucky boat.
Stay with them. "
" But remember how you went eighty-seven days without fish and then we caught big ones every day for three weeks. "
" I remember," the old man said. "
I know you did not leave me because you doubted. "
" It was papa made me leave.
I am a boy and I must obey him. "
" I know," the old man said. "
It is quite normal. "
" He hasn't much faith. "
" No," the old man said. "
But we have.
Haven't we? "
" Yes," the boy said. "
Can I offer you a beer on the Terrace and then we'll take the stuff home. "
"Why not? "
the old man said. "
Between fishermen. "
They sat on the Terrace and many of the fishermen made fun of the old man and he was not angry.
Others, of the older fishermen, looked at him and were sad.
But they did not show it and they spoke politely about the current and the depths they had drifted their lines at and the steady good weather and of what they had seen.
The successful fishermen of that day were already in and had butchered their marlin out and carried them laid full length across two planks, with two men staggering at the end of each plank, to the fish house where they waited for the ice truck to carry them to the market in Havana.
Those who had caught sharks had taken them to the shark factory on the other side of the cove where they were hoisted on a block and tackle, their livers removed, their fins cut off and their hides skinned out and their flesh cut into strips for salting.
When the wind was in the east a smell came across the harbour from the shark factory; but today there was only the faint edge of the odour because the wind had backed into the north and then dropped off and it was pleasant and sunny on the Terrace.
"Santiago," the boy said.
" Yes," the old man said.
He was holding his glass and thinking of many years ago.
" Can I go out to get sardines for you for tomorrow? "
" No.
Go and play baseball.
I can still row and Rogelio will throw the net. "
" I would like to go.
If I can't fish with you, I would like to serve in some way. "
" You bought me a beer," the old man said. "
You are already a man. "
" How old was I when you first took me in a boat? "
" Five and you nearly were killed when I brought the fish in too green and he nearly tore the boat to pieces.
Can you remember? "
" I can remember the tail slapping and banging and the thwart breaking and the noise of the clubbing.
I can remember you throwing me into the bow where the wet coiled lines were and feeling the whole boat shiver and the noise of you clubbing him like chopping a tree down and the sweet blood smell all over me. "
" Can you really remember that or did I just tell it to you? "
" I remember everything from when we first went together. "
The old man looked at him with his sun-burned, confident loving eyes.
Invite your audience carefully.
Not everyone is healthy enough to have a front row seat in our lives.
There are some people in your life that need to be loved from a distance.
It's amazing what you can accomplish when you let go of, or at least minimize your time with draining, negative, incompatible, not-going-anywhere relationships or friendships.
Observe the relationships around you.
Pay attention:
Which ones lift and which ones lean?
Which ones encourage and which ones discourage?
Which ones are on a path of going uphill and which ones are going downhill?
When you leave certain people, do you feel better or feel worse?
Which ones always have drama or don't really understand, know or appreciate you?
The more you seek quality, respect, growth, peace of mind, love and truth around you… the easier it will become for you to decide who gets to sit in the front row and who should be moved to the balcony of your life.
If you cannot change the people around you, change the people you are around.
Remember that the people we hang with will have an impact on both our lives and our income.
And so we must be careful to choose the people we hang with, as well as the information with which we feed our minds.
We should not share our dreams with negative people, nor feed our dreams with negative thoughts.
It's your choice and your life … it's up to you who and what you let in…
Napoleon declared: "Victory belongs to the most persevering."
Upon careful study we find perseverance depends upon three things - purpose, will, and enthusiasm.
He who has purpose is always concentrating his forces.
By the will, the hope and the plan are prevented from evaporating into dreams.
Enthusiasm keeps the interest up, and makes the obstacles seem small.
Life is in a sense a battle.
The man who thinks to get on by mere smartness and by idling meets failure at last.
Perseverance is the master impulse of the firmest souls, and holds the key to those treasure-houses of knowledge from which the world has drawn its wealth both of wisdom and of moral worth.
Great men never wait for opportunities; they make them.
They seize upon what ever is at hand, work out their problem, and master the situation.
The greatest thing a man can do in this world is to make the most possible out of the stuff that has been given to him.
This is success and there is no other.
One of the important lessons of life is to learn how to get victory out of defeat.
It takes courage and stamina, when mortified by humiliating disaster, to seek in the ruins the elements of future conquest.
Yet this measures the difference between those who succeed and those who fail.
We cannot measure a man by his failures.
We must know what use he makes of them.
The man who has not fought his way upward and does not bear the scar of desperate conflict does not know the highest meaning of success.
An old woman grew a large patch of corn behind her house.
A full corn said, "On the day of harvest, the old lady will certainly pick me first because I'm the best corn this year!"
But on the harvest day, the old woman didn't pick it.
" Tomorrow, tomorrow she will definitely pick me!"
the best corn comforted itself.
The next day the old woman got in some other corn but the best one.
" Tomorrow, the old lady will surely pick me!"
the best corn still comforted itself…
But from then on, the old woman never came until one day the best corn became disappointed.
The original full grain became dried and hard, its whole body seemed to be cracking, so it prepared to rot with the corn stalk.
Just at this moment the old woman came.
She said as she was picking it, "This is the best corn this year.
As seeds, they will certainly grow better corn next year! "
Perhaps you're always very confident, but do you have the patience to wait a little longer when you're in despair?
At first glance she looked like any other old woman.
Plodding along in the snow, alone, neglected, head bowed.
People passing on the busy city sidewalk averted their eyes, lest she remind them that pain and suffering did not stop to celebrate Christmas.
A young couple, smiling, talking, laughing, arms loaded with Christmas presents, took no notice of the old woman.
A mother with two small children hurried by, on their way to grandmother's house.
They took no notice.
A minister walked by proudly carrying his Bible in his right hand, like a well-armed Christian soldier.
But his mind was stayed on heavenly things, and he took no notice.
If these people had noticed, they would have seen that the old woman wore no shoes.
She walked barefoot in the ice and snow.
With both hands the old woman gathered her worn buttonless overcoat at the collar to keep out the wind.
She stopped and stood bent and bowed at the bus stop.
A red and blue scarf covering her head, she waited for the downtown bus.
A gentleman carrying an important-looking briefcase waited near her, not too closely.
After all, she could have something contagious.
A teenage girl also waited for the bus.
She glanced repeatedly at the old woman's feet, but said nothing.
The bus arrived and the old woman slowly, painfully boarded.
She sat on the sideways seat just behind the driver.
The gentleman and the teenage girl hurried to the rear.
The man sharing the seat with the old woman shuffled uneasily and twirled his thumbs. "
Senile," he thought.
A little boy pointed at the old woman.
"Look, Mother, that old lady is barefoot. "
The embarrassed mother slapped his hand down. "
Don't point at people, Andrew.
It's not polite to point. "
She looked out the window.
" She must have grown children," a lady in a fur coat suggested. "
Her children should be ashamed of themselves. "
She felt morally superior, because she took good care of her mother.
A teacher seated near the middle of the bus steadied the bag of gifts on her lap. "
Don't we pay enough taxes to handle situations like this? "
she said to a friend seated beside her.
" People have to learn to save their money," a well-dressed young college man added. "
If that old woman had saved when she was young, she wouldn't be suffering now.
It's her own fault. "
And all these people beamed with satisfaction that their acumen had delivered such trenchant analysis.
But, a kind businessman felt offended by this murmuring detachment of his fellow citizens.
He reached into his wallet and took out a crisp twenty-dollar bill.
He strode proudly down the aisle and pressed the bill into the old woman's unsteady, wrinkled hand. "
Here, Madam, get yourself some shoes. "
The old woman nodded her head in thanks.
The businessman strode back to his seat, feeling pleased with himself, that he was a man of action.
At the next stop, a young man boarded the bus.
He wore a heavy blue jacket, a maroon scarf around his neck, and a gray woolen cap pulled down over his ears.
A wire running under the cap and into his ear was connected to a Walkman.
The young man jiggled his body in time to music only he heard.
He paid his fare and plopped down on the sideways seat directly across from the old woman.
As the young man's glance caught the old woman's bare feet, his jiggling stopped.
He froze.
His eyes went from her feet to his.
He wore his expensive, new, brand name sneakers.
The young man bent down and began to untie his sneakers.
He removed his impressive new sneakers.
He removed his socks.
He knelt down before the old woman.
" Mother," he said, "I see you have no shoes.
Well, I have shoes. "
Carefully, gently, he lifted the old woman's crusty feet in his hands.
He placed his socks and his fine sneakers on the old woman's feet.
The old woman nodded in thanks.
Just then the bus arrived at the next stop.
The young man left the bus and walked away, barefoot in the snow.
The passengers crowded at the windows to watch him as he plodded barefoot through the snow.
" Who is he? "
one asked.
" He must be a prophet. "
Said another.
" He must be a saint," someone suggested.
" He must be an angel," said yet another.
But the little boy who had pointed, said, "No, Mother, I saw him clearly, he was only a man. "
Having worked at a Seven-Eleven store for two years, I thought I had become successful at what our manager called "customer relations".
I firmly believed that a friendly smile and an automatic "sir", "ma'am", and "thank you" would see me through any situation that might arise, from soothing impatient or unpleasant people to apologizing for giving out the wrong change.
But the other night an old woman shattered my belief that a glib response could smooth over the rough spots of dealing with other human beings.
The moment she entered, the woman presented a sharp contrast to our shiny store with its bright lighting and neatly arranged shelves.
Walking as if each step were painful, she slowly pushed open the glass door and hobbled down the nearest aisle.
She coughed dryly, wheezing with each breath.
On a forty-degree night, she was wearing only a faded print dress, a thin, light-beige sweater too small to button, and black vinyl slippers with the backs cut out to expose calloused heels.
There were no stockings or socks on her splotchy, blue-veined legs.
After strolling around the store for several minutes, the old woman stopped in front of the rows of canned vegetables.
She picked up some corn niblets and stared with a strange intensity at the label.
At that point, I decided to be a good, courteous employee and asked her if she needed help.
As I stood close to her, my smile became harder to maintain; her red-rimmed eyes were partially closed by yellowish crusts; her hands were covered with layer upon layer of grime, and the stale smell of sweat rose in a thick vaporous cloud from her clothes.
" I need some food," she muttered in reply to my bright "Can I help you? "
" Are you looking for corn, ma'am? "
" I need some food," she repeated, "Any kind. "
" Well, the corn is ninety-five cents," I said in my most helpful voice, "Or, if you like, we have a special on bologna today. "
" I can't pay," she said.
For a second, I was tempted to say, "Take the corn. "
But the employee roles flooded into my mind: Remain polite, but do not let customers get the best of you.
Let them know that you are in control.
For a moment, I even entertained the idea that this was some sort of test, and that this woman was someone from the head office, testing my loyalty.
I responded dutifully, "I'm sorry, ma'am, but I can't give away anything for free. "
The old woman's face collapsed a bit more, if that were possible, and her hands trembled as she put the can back on the shelf.
She shuffled past me toward the door, her torn and dirty clothing barely covering her bent back.
Moments after she left, I rushed out the door with the can of corn, but she was nowhere in sight.
For the rest of my shift, the image of the woman haunted me.
I had been young, healthy, and smug.
She had been old, sick, and desperate.
Wishing with all my heart that I had acted like a human being rather than a robot, I was saddened to realize how fragile a hold we have on our better instincts.
Step one:
Plant yourself deep in a bed of faith, and pack it down solid and tight.
Drench daily with positive thinking, and keep saturated just right.
Mulch often with forgiveness, for this will help you grow.
Quickly remove any seeds of worry, for they will soon germinate, and keep out the weeds of despair.
Nourish disappointments with hope whenever it is needed, and always stay cool and shaded when you feel irritated or heated.
Trim away guilt or depression, for they create decay, and cultivate with happy memories as often as every day.
Step two:
Harvest the lessons of the past; just dig, pick, and hoe.
And nurture the roots of the present, for now is when you flourish and grow.
Start planting for the future; set your goals in a row.
Spade the bed well for all your dreams to grow.
Step three:
Remember that grief is a natural predator, so learn to tolerate some damage.
Protect your garden with daily prayers, for this will help you manage.
Bury the criticism and complaining, for they are injurious pests.
Sow the seed of love wherever you may go - for joy, love, and laughter are surely bound to grow.
Although the thorns of life may be here to stay, just sprout a smile along the way… and be thankful for what you have today!
When surveyed, entrepreneurs say 29 is the ideal age to start a business.
The average age that entrepreneurs actually start a business is 35.
There's no perfect age to start living your dreams.
Being too young or too old is no excuse.
The perfect time to start is right now.
These people did.
Nola Ochs - The Energizer Student
In 1972, Nola Ochs was widowed on her wheat farm in the town of Jetmore, Kansas (population 1000).
She tended to her farm with the help of her children.
In 1978, she realized she wanted more from life.
Aged 68, she signed up for a tennis class at the nearest community college.
After ten years studying everything from agribusiness to the Bible, she was told that she was one class away from an associate degree.
All she must do was complete college algebra.
With an associate degree she was pleased but not fulfilled.
College algebra would not be the end of her scholarly career.
Several years later she decided to make the two hour trek to Fort Hays State University.
Enrolling at age 94, she lacked only 30 class hours to earn a bachelor's degree.
In May 2007, at 95, she became the world's oldest college graduate.
Is it time to sit back and enjoy the framed diploma on the farmhouse wall?
Not yet.
She started a Master's Degree.
Cliff Burgess - The Marathon Man
In 1993, Cliff Burgess was 55 years old.
He was tired of his potbelly and vowed to start walking.
Cliff hits the pavement in his suburban Texas town.
A walk around the block turns into twice around the block.
Walking feels good, but he knew he can pick up some speed.
The weight starts to come off as he signs up for 5km and 10km races.
In less than a year, he entered in the San Antonio marathon thinking of it as a training run in preparation for his first marathon - 42km (26.2 miles).
He feels good during the race, and he crossed the finish line faster than expected.
Averaging 15 marathons per year, he completed his 100th marathon six years later at the age of 62.
Reaching 100 marathons isn't the final goal.
He finds himself in Finland, France, Romania, China, Argentina, Brazil, 25 other countries, and nearly all of the 50 states of the USA in a record 15 years.
" Nothing happens unless first we dream. "
- - Carl Sandburg
Action summary
* There's never a perfect age to live your dreams.
The perfect age is right now.
* Make your goal known.
Travel one step at a time.
* Keep your dream alive.
Long-term goals exist because they take a long time.
* Success and determination are intimate siblings.
Talent is merely success' distant cousin.
Over the past few decades we have seen big jumps in economic growth in countries such as the U.S. and Japan, but only small increases in reported happiness.
Surveys of lottery winners and people on the Forbes 100 list have found they are not much happier than the average person.
So you can be happier, no matter what your income level.
Stop comparing.
When people make relative income comparisons, they frequently look at those who have more - and get upset when their income compares unfavorably, according to a study by Andrew Oswald of England's Warwick University.
Even if our incomes are rising, we tend to become less happy if the incomes of others are rising even more.
Never measure your financial achievements against anything except your own goals.
Be grateful.
Professor Sonia Lyubomirsky of University of California Riverside had subjects write down five things they were thankful for. "
Gratitude seems to be incompatible with some negative emotions.
It's hard to feel envious or greedy or bitter when you're grateful," Lyubomirsky explains.
One group wrote on a weekly basis; the other group three times a week; and a control group didn't write at all.
Only the group that did the exercise once a week experienced a significant rise in gratitude.
Don't make money a top priority.
People who say money is one of their most important goals score lower for mental health, according to a variety of studies conducted over the past decade by Dr. Tim Kasser, associate psychology professor at Knox College, and Dr. Richard Ryan, psychology professor at the University of Rochester.
Money-seekers suffer a greater risk of depression; have more anxiety and lower self-esteem; experience more physical, behavioral and relationship problems; and score lower on indicators testing for vitality (feeling alive and vigorous) and self-actualization.
The problems were not caused by being affluent but by making money a primary goal in life.
Be conscious of how you talk about money.
The way we explain things to ourselves has a big impact on our happiness, says author David Myers, professor at Michigan's Hope College.
Instead of saying, "I can't afford it," say, "I choose to spend my money on other things. "
Think of yourself as an empowered person making wise choices based on your values and priorities instead of a self-pitying victim who views life in terms of what he can't have.
Focus on essential psychological needs.
Money scored last on the list of psychological needs that create happiness and fulfillment, according to a study by Kennon Sheldon, psychologist at the University of Missouri-Columbia.
What are the four most essential needs?
Autonomy - feeling your actions are self-chosen and self-endorsed; competence - feeling effective in what you do; self-esteem; and a sense of closeness with others.
The University of Chicago's National Opinion Research Center found that people with five or more close friends are 50 percent more likely to describe themselves as "very happy" than respondents with fewer friends.
Help others.
Professor Lyubomirsky has done studies in which students were asked to practice altruism, doing five acts of kindness a week for six weeks.
The participants reported a significant rise in happiness.
Kind acts, she says, not only make you feel better about yourself, but foster a sense of interdependence and cooperation.
As our knowledge of health and fitness increases, people are becoming more and more interested in not only taking care of themselves physically, but mentally and spiritually as well.
As a result, many are turning to more complete approaches to health, including less mainstream fitness methods such as yoga.
Yoga's origins lie in Hindu philosophy, which was developed thousands of years ago in India.
Today, yoga is a system of movements and meditation that emphasizes physical control and discipline as a way to achieve a state of spiritual knowledge.
Yoga's ideal state of knowledge is reached after a person has gone through eight different stages.
These include aspects of self-control, religion, postures, regulation of breath, restraint of senses, steadying of the mind, meditation, and profound thought.
For a practitioner of yoga, or "yogi" the progression through these stages is a movement from the physical toward a perfect mental state.
There are eight major schools of yoga, each varying in its area of emphasis.
The type of yoga that is taught in the West is mainly a combination of exercise and meditation called Hatha Yoga.
Hatha Yoga is said to have a number of positive effects, such as reducing weight, strengthening muscles and nerves, cleaning out the body, and generally improving health and prolonging life.
Recent decades have seen yoga gain widespread acceptance as a method of staying in shape, as well as a way of handling stress.
Pop singer Madonna and super model Christy Turlington are just two of the many celebrities known to be strong advocates of yoga.
At present, there is a lot of speculation and uncertainty about yoga and its effects.
One thing, however, is certain: In our modern world of fast-paced lifestyles, taking time out to meditate and do some relaxing exercise cannot be a bad thing!