Over hundreds of millions of years, life spread through the seas and over Earth’s surface.
The first life-forms were small and simple.
Later forms were more complex and diverse.
Evolution is the theory in biology postulating that the various types of plants, animals, and other living things on Earth have their origin in other preexisting types and that the distinguishable differences are due to modifications in successive generations.
The theory of evolution is one of the fundamental keystones of modern biological theory.
The diversity of the living world is staggering.
More than 2 million existing species have been named and described; many more remain to be discovered - from 10 million to 30 million, according to some estimates.
What is impressive is not just the numbers but also the incredible heterogeneity in size, shape, and way of life.
The virtually infinite variations of life are the fruit of the evolutionary process.
All living creatures are related by descent from common ancestors.
Humans and other mammals descend from shrewlike creatures that lived more than 150 million years ago.
Mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fishes share as ancestors aquatic worms that lived 600 million years ago.
All plants and animals derive from bacteria-like microorganisms that originated more than 3 billion years ago.
Biological evolution is a process of descent with modification.
Lineages of organisms change through generations; diversity arises because the lineages that descend from common ancestors diverge through time.
The nineteenth-century English naturalist Charles Darwin argued that organisms come about by evolution.
He proposed a scientific explanation of how evolution occurs and why it is that organisms have features - such as wings, eyes, and kidneys - clearly structured to serve specific functions.
Natural selection was the fundamental concept in his explanation.
Natural selection is a process that occurs because individuals having more-useful traits, such as more-acute vision or swifter legs, survive better and produce more offspring than individuals with less-favorable traits.
Genetics, a science born in the twentieth century, reveals in detail how natural selection works and led to the development of the modern theory of evolution.
Beginning in the 1960s, a related scientific discipline, molecular biology, enormously advanced knowledge of biological evolution.
Molecular biology made it possible to investigate detailed problems that had seemed completely out of reach only a short time previously.
For example, the tremendous similarity between the genes of humans and chimpanzees was revealed by comparing their DNA.
Despite all that is held in common, however, the differences between humans and chimpanzees are crucial and distinguish humans as belonging to a distinct genus and species - Homo sapiens.
For example, chimpanzees and all their relatives are characteristically quadrupedal, meaning that they move about largely on all fours (using their hands as well as their feet).
This characteristic clearly adapts chimpanzees to tree climbing as part of their normal way of life.
Conversely, human feet have lost their grasping capabilities.
This is reflected in the fact that humans are bipedal, meaning that they walk upright on two feet.
Another key difference is that humans lack the fur coat that all other primates possess.
Among the greatest distinctions between humans and other primates are differences in brain size.
Relative to body size, human brains are nearly three times as large as those of the apes.
Humans are able to make extensive use of language, a system of spoken words, written symbols, and hand or body movements.
Language facilitates human survival; it strengthens social bonds and enables the expression of ideas.
The learning of previous generations is passed on through language, and new insights and experiences of individuals can become the property of the group as a whole when these are transmitted.
This clearly is a key part of human life, and it is a characteristically human attribute.
That body of transmitted learning and traditions is referred to as culture.
Human culture rests on a foundation of social complexity that, like physical characteristics, has evolved over the course of time.
Researchers assess brain size and the form of limbs, feet, and other body parts of extinct humans from fossil specimens.
It is much less easy, however, to determine whether extinct humans had fur or what early speech sounded like.
The origin of the human species occurred in stages beginning about 7–4 million years ago, when hominins in the genera Sahelanthropus, Orrorin, and Ardipithecus first appeared in the fossil record.
Anatomically modern humans, H. sapiens, made their first appearance about 200,000 years ago.
The species from which H. sapiens evolved directly remains uncertain, but a likely candidate is H. heidelbergensis.
Understanding human evolution is an immensely important area of research in the modern era.
Knowledge of the species that are ancestral to humans and of the places in which humans evolved provides context for a better understanding of human genetic and evolutionary relationships with other species.
Knowledge of how early humans survived and how they used the resources available to them offers insight into human instinct and behavior.
Most of all, knowledge about human origins allows a glance at the early history of humans, during a period of time and into a world almost unthinkable to people of the twenty-first century and that nevertheless determined the basic nature of their being.
In this resource, readers will be treated to a general overview of evolution, the theory of evolution as proposed by Charles Darwin, and an introduction to the relevant fossil record.
You will also consider the likely beginnings of human evolution, the fossil evidence, relevant theories and refinements in human traits and culture, and the emergence of Homo sapiens as a modern species.
Charles Darwin and other nineteenth-century biologists found compelling evidence for evolution in the comparative study of living organisms, in their geographic distribution, and in the fossil remains of extinct organisms.
Since Darwin’s time, the evidence from these sources has become considerably stronger and more comprehensive.
Biological disciplines that emerged more recently - genetics, biochemistry, physiology, ecology, animal behavior (ethology), and especially molecular biology - have supplied powerful additional evidence and detailed confirmation.
The amount of information about evolutionary history stored in the DNA and proteins of living things is virtually unlimited; scientists can reconstruct any detail of the evolutionary history of life by investing sufficient time and laboratory resources.
Evolutionists no longer are concerned with obtaining evidence to support the fact of evolution but rather are concerned with what sorts of knowledge can be obtained from different sources of evidence.
The following sections identify the most productive of these sources and illustrate the types of information they have provided.
CHARLES DARWIN AND THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION
The founder of the modern theory of evolution was Charles Darwin.
The son and grandson of physicians, he enrolled as a medical student at the University of Edinburgh.
After two years, he left to study at the University of Cambridge and to prepare to become a clergyman.
He was not an exceptional student, but he was deeply interested in natural history.
On December 27, 1831, a few months after his graduation from Cambridge, he sailed as a naturalist aboard the HMS Beagle on a round-the-world trip that lasted until October 1836.
Darwin was often able to disembark for extended trips ashore to collect natural specimens.
The discovery of fossil bones from large extinct mammals in Argentina and the observation of numerous species of finches in the Galápagos Islands were among the events that stimulated Darwin’s interest in how species originate.
In 1859, he published On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, a paper establishing the theory of evolution and the key role of natural selection in determining its course.
He published many other books as well, notably The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex (1871), which extends the theory of natural selection to human evolution.
Darwin is viewed as a great intellectual revolutionary whose work continued the Copernican revolution that had begun in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries under Nicolaus Copernicus, Galileo, and Isaac Newton, among others.
The Copernican revolution marked the beginnings of modern science.
Earth no longer was seen as the center of the universe but was instead viewed as a small planet revolving around one of myriad stars.
The seasons and the various forms of weather became understood as natural processes.
The movements of the planets were now explained by simple laws.
The significance of these and other discoveries was that they led to a view of the universe as a system of matter in motion governed by laws of nature.
Darwin extended this concept to the living world.
Before Darwin, the origin of Earth’s living things had been attributed to the design of a Creator.
Darwin accumulated evidence showing that evolution had occurred, that diverse organisms share common ancestors, and that living beings have changed drastically over the course of Earth’s history.
The workings of the universe no longer needed to be attributed to the will of a divine Creator; rather, they were brought into the realm of science - an explanation of phenomena through natural laws.
In providing a natural explanation for the organization and functional design of living beings, Darwin showed that the diversity of plants and animals, with their exquisite and varied adaptations, could be explained by a process of natural selection, without recourse to a Creator or any designer agent.
Charles Darwin, pictured here in the late 1830s, formed his scientific theory of evolution by natural selection around 1837–1839.
Darwin’s theory of natural selection is summarized in the Origin of Species as follows:
As many more individuals are produced than can possibly survive, there must in every case be a struggle for existence, either one individual with another of the same species, or with the individuals of distinct species, or with the physical conditions of life …Can it, then, be thought improbable, seeing that variations useful to man have undoubtedly occurred, that other variations useful in some way to each being in the great and complex battle of life, should sometimes occur in the course of thousands of generations?
If such do occur, can we doubt (remembering that many more individuals are born than can possibly survive) that individuals having any advantage, however slight, over others, would have the best chance of surviving and of procreating their kind?
On the other hand, we may feel sure that any variation in the least degree injurious would be rigidly destroyed.
This preservation of favourable variations and the rejection of injurious variations, I call Natural Selection.
Natural selection was proposed by Darwin primarily to account for the adaptive organization of living beings; it is a process that promotes or maintains adaptation.
Evolutionary change through time is not directly promoted by natural selection, but it often emerges as a by-product of natural selection as it fosters adaptation to different environments.
These dinosaur fossils were found in Alberta, Canada.
The data recorded in fossils worldwide, called the fossil record, is the primary source of information about the history of life on Earth.
Paleontologists have recovered and studied the fossil remains of many thousands of organisms that lived in the past.
This fossil record shows that many kinds of extinct organisms were very different in form from any now living.
It also shows successions of organisms through time, demonstrating their transition from one form to another.
When an organism dies, it is usually destroyed by other forms of life and by weathering processes.
On rare occasions, some body parts - particularly hard ones such as shells, teeth, or bones - are preserved by being buried in mud or protected in some other way from predators and weather.
Eventually, these parts may become petrified and preserved with the rocks in which they are embedded.
Methods such as radiometric dating - measuring the amounts of natural radioactive atoms that remain in certain minerals to determine the elapsed time since they were constituted - make it possible to estimate the time period when the rocks, and the fossils associated with them, were formed.
Radiometric dating indicates that Earth was formed about 4.5 billion years ago.
The history of life recorded by fossils presents compelling evidence of evolution.
The earliest fossils resemble microorganisms such as bacteria and cyanobacteria (blue-green algae); the oldest of these fossils appear in rocks 3.5 billion years old.
The oldest known animal fossils, about 700 million years old, come from the so-called Ediacara fauna, small wormlike creatures with soft bodies.
Numerous fossils belonging to many living phyla and exhibiting mineralized skeletons appear in rocks about 540 million years old.
These organisms are different from organisms living now and from those living at intervening times.
Some are so radically different that paleontologists have created new phyla in order to classify them.
The first vertebrates (animals with backbones) appeared about 400 million years ago; the first mammals, less than 200 million years ago.
The fossil record is incomplete.
Of the small proportion of organisms preserved as fossils, only a tiny fraction have been recovered and studied by paleontologists.
In some cases, the succession of forms over time has been reconstructed in detail.
One example is the evolution of the horse.
The horse can be traced to an animal the size of a dog having several toes on each foot and teeth appropriate for browsing (eating leaves, stems, and other plant material from shrubs and trees).
This animal, called the dawn horse (genus Hyracotherium), lived more than 50 million years ago.
The most recent form, the modern horse (Equus), is much larger in size, is one-toed, and has teeth appropriate for grazing (eating grasses and similar vegetation).
The transitional forms are well preserved as fossils, as are many other kinds of extinct horses that evolved in different directions and left no living descendants.
Using recovered fossils, paleontologists have reconstructed examples of radical evolutionary transitions in form and function.
For example, the lower jaw of reptiles contains several bones, but that of mammals only one.
The other bones in the reptile jaw unmistakably evolved into bones now found in the mammalian ear.
At first, such a transition would seem unlikely - it is hard to imagine what function such bones could have had during their intermediate stages.
Yet paleontologists discovered two transitional forms of mammal-like reptiles, called therapsids, that had a double jaw joint (that is, two hinge points side by side) - one joint consisting of the bones that persist in the mammalian jaw and the other composed of the quadrate and articular bones, which eventually became the hammer and anvil of the mammalian ear.
For skeptical contemporaries of Darwin, the “missing link” - the absence of any known transitional form between apes and humans - was a battle cry, as it remained for uninformed people afterward.
Not one but many animals intermediate between living apes and humans have since been found as fossils.
The oldest known fossil hominins - that is, primates belonging to the human lineage after it separated from lineages going to the apes - are 6 million to 7 million years old.
They come from Africa, and are known as Sahelanthropus and Orrorin (or Praeanthropus), which were predominantly bipedal when on the ground but which had very small brains.
Another hominin from Africa was Ardipithecus, which lived about 4.4 million years ago.
Numerous fossil remains from diverse African origins are known of Australopithecus, a hominin that appeared between 3 million and 4 million years ago.
Australopithecus had an upright human stance but a cranial capacity of less than 500 cubic centimeters (cc).
This is equivalent to a brain weight of about 500 grams, comparable to that of a gorilla or a chimpanzee and about one-third that of humans.
Its head displayed a mixture of ape and human characteristics - a low forehead and a long, apelike face but with teeth proportioned like those of humans.
Other early hominins partly contemporaneous with Australopithecus include Kenyanthropus and Paranthropus; both had comparatively small brains, although some species of Paranthropus had larger bodies.
Paranthropus represents a side branch in the hominin lineage that became extinct.
The fossilized remains of “Lucy,” the nickname for this hominin specimen of Australopithecus afarensis, dated to 3.2 million years ago.
Lucy was discovered in 1974 in Hadar, Ethiopia.
Along with increased cranial capacity, other human characteristics have been found in Homo habilis, which lived about 1.5 million to 2 million years ago in Africa and had a cranial capacity of more than 600 cc (brain weight of 600 grams), and in H. erectus, which lived between 0.5 million and more than 1.5 million years ago.
H. erectus apparently ranged widely over Africa, Asia, and Europe, and had a cranial capacity of 800 to 1,100 cc (brain weight of 800 to 1,100 grams).
The brain sizes of H. ergaster, H. antecessor, and H. heidelbergensis were roughly that of the brain of H. erectus, some of which species were partly contemporaneous, though they lived in different regions of the Eastern Hemisphere.
THE “MISSING LINK”
The “missing link,” is a hypothetical extinct creature halfway in the evolutionary line between modern human beings and their anthropoid progenitors.
In the latter half of the nineteenth century, a common misinterpretation of Charles Darwin’s work was that humans were directly descended from existing species of apes.
To accept this theory and reconcile it with the hierarchical Great Chain of Being, some fossil ape-man or man-ape seemed necessary in order to complete the chain.
Today it is recognized that the relationship of modern humans to the present anthropoid apes (for example, chimpanzees) is through common ancestors rather than through direct descent.
These ancestors have yet to be identified, but ape-hominid divergence may have occurred 6 to 10 million years ago.
The skeletons of turtles, horses, humans, birds, and bats are strikingly similar, in spite of the different ways of life of these animals and the diversity of their environments.
The correspondence, bone by bone, can easily be seen not only in the limbs but also in every other part of the body.
From a purely practical point of view, it is incomprehensible that a turtle should swim, a horse run, a person write, and a bird or a bat fly with forelimb structures built of the same bones.
An engineer could design better limbs in each case.
But if it is accepted that all of these skeletons inherited their structures from a common ancestor and became modified only as they adapted to different ways of life, the similarity of their structures makes sense.
Inherited similarities, or homologies, of the forelimb among six vertebrates (turtle, dolphin, horse, human, bird, and bat) give evidence for evolution.
The bones correspond, although they are adapted to the animal’s specific way of life.
Comparative anatomy investigates the homologies, or inherited similarities, among organisms in bone structure and in other parts of the body.
The correspondence of structures is typically very close among some organisms - the different varieties of songbirds, for instance - but becomes less so as the organisms being compared are less closely related in their evolutionary history.
The similarities are less between mammals and birds than they are among mammals, and they are still less between mammals and fishes.
Similarities in structure, therefore, not only demonstrate evolution but also help to reconstruct the phylogeny, or evolutionary history, of organisms.
Comparative anatomy also reveals why most organismic structures are not perfect.
Like the forelimbs of turtles, horses, humans, birds, and bats, an organism’s body parts are less than perfectly adapted because they are modified from an inherited structure rather than designed from completely “raw” materials for a specific purpose.
The imperfection of structures is evidence for evolution and against antievolutionist arguments that invoke intelligent design.
Darwin and his followers found support for evolution in the study of embryology, the science that investigates the development of organisms from fertilized egg to time of birth or hatching.
Vertebrates, from fishes through lizards to humans, develop in ways that are remarkably similar during early stages, but they become more and more differentiated as the embryos approach maturity.
The similarities persist longer between organisms that are more closely related (for example, humans and monkeys) than between those less closely related (humans and sharks).
Common developmental patterns reflect evolutionary kinship.
Lizards and humans share a developmental pattern inherited from their remote common ancestor; the inherited pattern of each was modified only as the separate descendant lineages evolved in different directions.
The common embryonic stages of the two groups reflect the constraints imposed by this common inheritance, which prevents changes that have not been necessitated by their diverging environments and ways of life.
The embryos of humans and other nonaquatic vertebrates exhibit gill slits even though they never breathe through gills.
These slits are found in the embryos of all vertebrates because they share as common ancestors the fish in which these structures first evolved.
Human embryos also exhibit by the fourth week of development a well-defined tail, which reaches maximum length at six weeks.
Similar embryonic tails are found in other mammals, such as dogs, horses, and monkeys; in humans, however, the tail eventually shortens, persisting only as a rudiment in the adult coccyx bone.
Vertebrate embryos look much alike in the early stages of development (top row).
As time goes by, they become more dissimilar.
A close evolutionary relationship between organisms that appear drastically different as adults can sometimes be recognized by their embryonic homologies.
Barnacles, for example, are sedentary crustaceans with little apparent likeness to such free-swimming crustaceans as lobsters or shrimps.
Yet barnacles pass through a free-swimming larval stage, the nauplius, which is unmistakably similar to that of other crustacean larvae.
Embryonic rudiments that never fully develop, such as the gill slits in humans, are common in all sorts of animals.
Some, however, like the tail rudiment in humans, persist as adult vestiges, reflecting evolutionary ancestry.
The most familiar rudimentary organ in humans is the vermiform appendix.
This wormlike structure attaches to a short section of intestine called the cecum, which is located at the point where the large and small intestines join.
The human vermiform appendix is a vestige of a fully developed organ present in other mammals, such as the rabbit and certain other herbivores, where a large cecum stores and digests vegetable cellulose with the help of bacteria.
Vestiges are instances of imperfections - like the imperfections seen in anatomical structures - that argue against creation by design but are fully understandable as a result of evolution.
Darwin also saw a confirmation of evolution in the geographic distribution of plants and animals, and later knowledge has reinforced his observations.
For example, there are about 1,500 known species of Drosophila, or vinegar flies (also called fruit flies), in the world.
Nearly one-third of them live in Hawaii and nowhere else, although the total area of the archipelago is less than one-twentieth the area of California or Germany.
Also in Hawaii are more than 1,000 species of snails and other land mollusks that exist nowhere else.
This unusual diversity is easily explained by evolution.
The islands of Hawaii are extremely isolated and have had few colonizers - that is, animals and plants that arrived there from elsewhere and established populations.
Those species that did colonize the islands found many unoccupied ecological niches, local environments suited to sustaining them and lacking predators that would prevent them from multiplying.
In response, these species rapidly diversified; this process of diversifying in order to fill ecological niches is called adaptive radiation.
Fourteen species of Galápagos finches, also called Darwin’s finches, evolved from a common ancestor.
The different shapes of their bills, suited to different diets and habitats, show the process of adaptive radiation.
Each of the world’s continents has its own distinctive collection of animals and plants.
In Africa are rhinoceroses, hippopotamuses, lions, hyenas, giraffes, zebras, lemurs, monkeys with narrow noses and nonprehensile tails, chimpanzees, and gorillas.
South America, which extends over much the same latitudes as Africa, has none of these animals; it instead has pumas, jaguars, tapir, llamas, raccoons, opossums, armadillos, and monkeys with broad noses and large prehensile tails.
These vagaries of biogeography are not due solely to the suitability of the different environments.
There is no reason to believe that South American animals are not well suited to living in Africa or those of Africa to living in South America.
The islands of Hawaii are no better suited than other Pacific islands for vinegar flies, nor are they less hospitable than other parts of the world for many absent organisms.
In fact, although no large mammals are native to the Hawaiian islands, pigs and goats have multiplied there as wild animals since being introduced by humans.
This absence of many species from a hospitable environment in which an extraordinary variety of other species flourish can be explained by the theory of evolution, which holds that species can exist and evolve only in geographic areas that were colonized by their ancestors.
The field of molecular biology provides the most detailed and convincing evidence available for biological evolution.
In its unveiling of the nature of DNA and the workings of organisms at the level of enzymes and other protein molecules, it has shown that these molecules hold information about an organism’s ancestry.
This has made it possible to reconstruct evolutionary events that were previously unknown and to confirm and adjust the view of events already known.
The precision with which these events can be reconstructed is one reason the evidence from molecular biology is so compelling.
Another reason is that molecular evolution has shown all living organisms, from bacteria to humans, to be related by descent from common ancestors.
A remarkable uniformity exists in the molecular components of organisms - in the nature of the components as well as in the ways in which they are assembled and used.
In all living things, from bacteria and fungi to plants, animals, and humans, the DNA comprises a different sequence of the same four component nucleotides.
All the various proteins in living things are synthesized from different combinations and sequences of the same twenty amino acids, although several hundred other amino acids do exist.
The genetic code by which the information contained in the DNA of the cell nucleus is passed on to proteins is virtually the same everywhere.
Similar metabolic pathways - sequences of biochemical reactions - are used by the most diverse organisms to produce energy and to make up the cell components.
This unity reveals the genetic continuity and common ancestry of all organisms.
There is no other rational way to account for their molecular uniformity when numerous alternative structures are equally likely.
The genetic code serves as an example.
Each particular sequence of three nucleotides in an organism’s DNA acts as a pattern for the production of exactly the same amino acid in all organisms.
This is no more necessary than it is for a language to use a particular combination of letters to represent a particular object.
If it is found that certain sequences of letters - planet, tree, woman - are used with identical meanings in a number of different books, one can be sure that the languages used in those books are of common origin.
DNA (left) is formed of two nucleotide chains twisted into a double helix.
The chains (right) resemble a ladder––the sides consist of a sugar-phosphate complex, and the rungs are formed by nitrogenous base pairs.
Genes and proteins are long molecules that contain information in the sequence of their components in much the same way as sentences of the English language contain information in the sequence of their letters and words.
The sequences that make up the genes are passed on from parents to offspring and are identical except for occasional changes introduced by mutations.
As an illustration, imagine comparing two books.
Both books are two hundred pages long and contain the same number of chapters.
Closer examination reveals that the two books are identical page for page and word for word, except that an occasional word - say, one in one hundred - is different.
The two books cannot have been written independently; either one has been copied from the other, or both have been copied, directly or indirectly, from the same original book.
Similarly, if each component nucleotide of DNA is represented by one letter, the complete sequence of nucleotides in the DNA of a higher organism would require several hundred books of hundreds of pages, with several thousand letters on each page.
When the “pages” (or sequences of nucleotides) in these “books” (organisms) are examined one by one, the correspondence in the “letters” (nucleotides) gives unmistakable evidence of common origin.
The two arguments just presented are based on different grounds, although both attest to evolution.
Using the alphabet analogy, the first argument says that languages that use the same dictionary - the same genetic code and the same twenty amino acids - cannot be of independent origin.
The second argument, concerning similarity in the sequence of nucleotides in the DNA (and thus the sequence of amino acids in the proteins), says that books with very similar texts cannot be of independent origin.
The evidence of evolution revealed by molecular biology goes even farther.
The degree of similarity in the sequence of nucleotides or of amino acids can be precisely quantified.
For example, in humans and chimpanzees, the protein molecule called cytochrome c, which serves a vital function in respiration within cells, consists of the same 104 amino acids in exactly the same order.
It differs, however, from the cytochrome c of rhesus monkeys by 1 amino acid, from that of horses by 11 additional amino acids, and from that of tuna by 21 additional amino acids.
The degree of similarity reflects the recency of common ancestry.
Thus, the inferences from comparative anatomy and other disciplines concerning evolutionary history can be tested in molecular studies of DNA and proteins by examining their sequences of nucleotides and amino acids.
The authority of this kind of test is overwhelming; each of the thousands of genes and thousands of proteins contained in an organism provides an independent test of that organism’s evolutionary history.
Not all possible tests have been performed, but many hundreds have been done, and not one has given evidence contrary to evolution.
There is probably no other notion in any field of science that has been as extensively tested and as thoroughly corroborated as the evolutionary origin of living organisms.
Human evolution is the process by which human beings developed on Earth from now-extinct primates.
Viewed zoologically, we humans are Homo sapiens, a culture-bearing, upright-walking species that lives on the ground and very likely first evolved in Africa about 200,000 years ago.
We are now the only living members of what many zoologists refer to as the human tribe, Hominini.
However, there is abundant fossil evidence to indicate that we were preceded for millions of years by other hominins, such as Australopithecus, and that our species also lived for a time contemporaneously with at least one other member of our genus, Homo neanderthalensis (the Neanderthals).
In addition, we and our predecessors have always shared Earth with other apelike primates, from the modern-day gorilla to the long-extinct Dryopithecus.
That we and the extinct hominins are somehow related and that we and the apes, both living and extinct, are also somehow related is accepted by anthropologists and biologists everywhere.
Yet the exact nature of our evolutionary relationships has been the subject of debate and investigation since Charles Darwin published his landmark books On the Origin of Species (1859) and The Descent of Man (1871).
Darwin never claimed, as some of his Victorian contemporaries insisted he had, that “man was descended from the apes.”
Modern scientists would view such a statement as a useless simplification - just as they would dismiss any popular notions that a certain extinct species is the “missing link” between man and the apes.
There is theoretically, however, a common ancestor that existed millions of years ago.
This ancestral species does not constitute a “missing link” along a lineage but rather a point of divergence into separate lineages.
This ancient primate has not been identified and may never be known with certainty, because fossil relationships are unclear even within the human lineage, which is more recent.
In fact, the human “family tree” may be better described as a “family bush,” within which it is impossible to connect a full chronological series of species, leading to Homo sapiens, that experts can agree upon.
It took millions of years for modern humans to evolve from an apelike ancestor.
Great apes share the same ancestor but evolved through a separate line.
The primary resource for detailing the path of human evolution will always be fossil specimens.
Certainly, the trove of fossils from Africa and Eurasia indicates that, unlike today, more than one species of our family have lived at the same time for most of human history.
The nature of specific fossil specimens and species can be accurately described, as can the location where they were found and the period of time when they lived.
However, questions of how species lived and why they might have either died out or evolved into other species can only be addressed by formulating scenarios, albeit scientifically informed ones.
These scenarios are based on contextual information gleaned from localities where the fossils were collected.
In devising such scenarios and filling in the human family bush, researchers must consult a large and diverse array of fossils; they must also employ refined excavation methods and records, geochemical dating techniques, and data from other specialized fields such as genetics, ecology and paleoecology, and ethology (animal behavior) - in short, all the tools of the science of paleoanthropology.
HOMININS
A hominin is any member of the zoological tribe Hominini (family Hominidae, order Primates), of which only one species exists today - Homo sapiens, or human beings.
The term is used most often to refer to extinct members of the human lineage, some of which are now quite well known from fossil remains: H. neanderthalensis (the Neanderthals), H. erectus, H. habilis, and various species of Australopithecus.
In addition, many authorities place the genera Ardipithecus, Orrorin, and Kenyanthropus in Hominini.
The primate group most closely related to Hominini today is Gorillini (the African apes), comprising the gorilla, the chimpanzee, and the bonobo.
Gorillini and Hominini are part of the great ape family, Hominidae.
Some characteristics that have distinguished hominins from other primates, living and extinct, are their erect posture, bipedal locomotion, larger brains, and behavioral characteristics such as specialized tool use and, in some cases, communication through language.
It is generally agreed that the taproot of the human family shrub is to be found among apelike species of the Middle Miocene Epoch (16.4 to 11.2 million years ago [mya]) or Late Miocene Epoch (11.2–5.3 mya).
Genetic data based on molecular clock estimates support a Late Miocene ancestry.
Various Eurasian and African Miocene primates have been advocated as possible ancestors to the early hominins, which came on the scene during the Pliocene Epoch (5.3–2.6 mya).
Alhough there is no consensus among experts, the primates suggested include Kenyapithecus, Griphopithecus, Dryopithecus, Graecopithecus (Ouranopithecus), Samburupithecus, Sahelanthropus, and Orrorin.
The primate Kenyapithecus inhabited Kenya and Griphopithecus lived in central Europe and Turkey from about 16 to 14 mya.
Dryopithecus is best known from western and central Europe, where it lived from 13 to possibly 8 mya.
Graecopithecus lived in northern and southern Greece about 9 mya, at roughly the same time as Samburupithecus in northern Kenya.
Sahelanthropus inhabited Chad between 7 and 6 million years ago.
Orrorin was from central Kenya 6 mya.
Among these, the most likely ancestor of great apes and humans may be either Kenyapithecus or Griphopithecus.
Among evolutionary models that stress the Eurasian species, some consider Graecopithecus to be ancestral only to the human lineage, containing Australopithecus, Paranthropus, and Homo, whereas others entertain the possibility that Graecopithecus is close to the great-ape ancestry of Pan (chimpanzees and bonobos) and Gorilla as well.
In the former model, Dryopithecus is ancestral to Pan and Gorilla.
On the other hand, others would have Dryopithecus ancestral to Pan and Australopithecus on the way to Homo, with Graecopithecus ancestral to Gorilla.
This morphology-based model mirrors results of some molecular studies, which show chimpanzees, bonobos, and humans to be more closely related to one another than any of them is to gorillas; orangutans are more distantly related.
In a phylogenetic model that emphasizes African Miocene species, Samburupithecus is ancestral to Australopithecus, Paranthropus, and Orrorin, and Orrorin begets Australopithecus afarensis, which is ancestral to Homo.
The Miocene Epoch was characterized by major global climatic changes that led to more seasonal conditions with increasingly colder winters north of the equator.
By the Late Miocene, in many regions inhabited by apelike primates, evergreen broad-leaved forests were replaced by open woodlands, shrublands, grasslands, and mosaic habitats, sometimes with denser-canopied forests bordering lakes, rivers, and streams.
Such diverse environments stimulated novel adaptations involving locomotion in many types of animals, including primates.
In addition, there were a larger variety and greater numbers of antelope, pigs, monkeys, giraffes, elephants, and other animals for adventurous hominins to scavenge and perhaps kill.
But large cats, dogs, and hyenas also flourished in the new environments; they not only would provide meat for scavenging hominins but also would compete with and probably prey upon them.
In any case, our ancestors were not strictly or even heavily carnivorous.
Instead, a diet that relied on tough, abrasive vegetation, including seeds, stems, nuts, fruits, leaves, and tubers, is suggested by primate remains bearing large premolar and molar teeth with thick enamel.
Behavior and morphology associated with locomotion also responded to the shift from arboreal to terrestrial life.
The development of bipedalism enabled hominins to establish new niches in forests, closed woodlands, open woodlands, and even more open areas over a span of at least 4.5 million years.
Indeed, obligate terrestrial bipedalism (that is, the ability and necessity of walking only on the lower limbs) is the defining trait required for classification in the human tribe, Hominini.
Structural differences allow humans to walk upright on two legs with a striding gait rather than move in a knuckle-walking way like the gorilla.
The pelvis has a different shape.
Human femurs are long and set farther apart at the hips than at the knees.
Bipedalism, the bipedal abilities of primates, the fossil evidence of hominins, the theories that try to explain why humans are bipedal, and various hominin habitats are described in the following sections.
Bipedalism is not unique to humans, though our particular form of it is.
Whereas most other mammalian bipeds hop or waddle, we stride.
Homo sapiens is the only mammal that is adapted exclusively to bipedal striding.
Unlike most other mammalian orders, the primates have hind-limb-dominated locomotion.
Accordingly, human bipedalism is a natural development from the basic arboreal (tree-dwelling) primate body plan, in which the hind limbs are used to move about and sitting upright is common during feeding and rest.
The initial changes toward an upright posture were probably related more to standing, reaching, and squatting than to extended periods of walking and running.
Human beings stand with fully extended hip and knee joints, such that the thighbones are aligned with their respective leg bones to form continuous vertical columns.
To walk, one simply tilts forward slightly and then keeps up with the displaced center of mass, which is located within the pelvis.
The large muscle masses of the human lower limbs power our locomotion and enable a person to rise from squatting and sitting postures.
Body mass is transferred through the pelvis, thighs, and legs to the heels, balls of the feet, and toes.
Remarkably little muscular effort is expended to stand in place.
Indeed, our large buttock, anterior thigh, and calf muscles are virtually unused when we stand still.
Instead of muscular contraction, the human bipedal stance depends more on the way in which joints are constructed and on strategically located ligaments that hold the joints in position.
Fortunately for paleoanthropologists, some bones show dramatic signs of how a given hominin carried itself, and the adaptation to obligate terrestrial bipedalism led to notable anatomic differences between hominins and great apes.
These differences are readily identified in fossils, particularly those of the pelvis and lower limbs.
Although we are bipedal, our pelvis is oriented like that of quadrupedal primates.
The early bipedal hominins assumed erect trunk posture by bending the spine upward, particularly in the lower back (lumbar region).
In order to transfer full upper-body mass to the lower limbs and to reposition muscles so that one could walk without assistance from the upper limbs and without wobbling from side to side, changes were required in the pelvis - particularly in the ilia (the large, blade-shaped bones on either side), the ischia (protuberances on which body rests when sitting), and the sacrum (a wedge-shaped bone formed by the fusing of vertebrae).
Hominin hip bones have short ilia with large areas that articulate with a short, broad sacrum.
Conversely, great-ape hip bones have long ilia with small sacral articular areas, and sacra of the great apes are long and narrow.
The human pelvis is unique among primates in having the ilia curved forward so that the inner surfaces face one another instead of being aligned sideways, as in apes and other quadrupeds.
Curved ilia situate some of the gluteal muscles on the side of the hip joint, where they steady the pelvis as the foot swings forward during a step.
This special mechanism allows us to walk smoothly, with only slight oscillations of the pelvis and without gross side-to-side motions of the upper body.
Humans have short ischia (and long lower limbs), facilitating speedy actions of the hamstring muscles, which extend the thigh at the hip joint.
Great apes have long ischia (and short hind limbs), which give them powerful hip extension for climbing up trees.
Characteristically, a human thighbone is long and has a very large, globular head and a short, round neck; at the knee a prominent lateral ridge buttresses the groove in which the kneecap lies.
The femurs are farther apart at the hips than at the knees and slant toward the midline to keep the knees close together.
This angle allows anthropologists to recognize bipedalism even if the fossil is only the knee end of a femur.
The femurs of quadrupedal great apes, on the other hand, do not converge toward the knees, and the femoral shafts lack telltale angling.
Human feet are distinct from those of apes and monkeys.
This is not surprising, since in humans the feet must support and propel the entire body on their own instead of sharing the load with the forelimbs.
In humans, the heel is very robust, and the great toe is permanently aligned with the four diminutive lateral toes.
Unlike other primate feet, which have a mobile midfoot, the human foot possesses (if not requires) a stable arch to give it strength.
Accordingly, human footprints are unique and are readily distinguished from those of other animals.
By 3.5 million years ago, at least one hominin species, A. afarensis, was an adept walker.
In addition to anatomic evidence from this time, there is also a 90-foot (27.5-meter) trackway produced by three individuals who walked at a leisurely pace on moist volcanic ash at Laetoli in northern Tanzania.
In all observable features of foot shape and walking pattern, they are astonishingly similar to those of habitually barefoot people who live in the tropics today.
Nevertheless, although the feet of the Laetoli hominins appear to be strikingly human, one should not assume that other parts of their bodies were as similar to ours.
A trail of footprints, probably left by Australopithecus afarensis individuals some 3.6 million years ago, was found at Laetoli, in northern Tanzania.
The fragmentary femoral remains found in Kenya of six-million-year-old Orrorin tugenensis indicate to some experts that they too were bipeds.
Ardipithecus ramidus (5.8–4.4 mya), a primate from Aramis, central Ethiopia, was also bipedal.
In this case, the evidence comes from the foramen magnum, the hole in the skull through which the spinal cord enters.
In Ardipithecus this opening is similar to ours in being located centrally under the skull instead of at the rear of it.
A rear-facing foramen magnum indicates a stooped posture, whereas a downward-facing hole positions the skull atop the spinal column.
Other characteristics indicative of bipedalism in Ardipithecus include an increased tarsal region in each foot and a pelvic structure with muscle-to-bone attachment sites comparable to later, bipedal hominins.
In addition, the leg bone of Australopithecus anamensis from northern Kenya (4.2–3.9 mya) attests to its bipedalism.
All hominins living at the time of the Laetoli track makers were probably obligate bipeds when on the ground, but some of them (including some younger species) exhibit features that argue for regular arboreal climbing, probably for food, rest, nightly lodging, and predator avoidance.
Hadar, in northern Ethiopia, has yielded a trove of remains of A. afarensis (3.8–2.9 mya).
They include many parts of the locomotor skeleton that reveal a bipedal habit: short ilia, a wide and stout sacrum, and femoral angling, among other features.
At the same time, the curved fingers and toes, laterally flared ilia, and short femurs with long upper limbs, as well as the configuration of its rib cage, indicate that they could readily climb and maneuver in trees.
A. bahrelghazali (3.5–3.0 mya) of central Chad and Kenyanthropus platyops (3.5 mya) from northern Kenya are represented solely by teeth and by skull and jaw fragments from which positional behavior cannot be inferred.
Parts of the locomotor skeletons of later hominins such as A. africanus (3.3–2.4 mya) and Paranthropus robustus (1.8–1.5 mya) of South Africa do not differ markedly from those of A. afarensis.
The locomotor skeleton of eastern African P. boisei (2.2–1.3 mya) is poorly known, but there is no reason to assume that it was different from other Paranthropus species.
Bouri, a 2.5-million-year-old site in central Ethiopia, yielded arm and leg bones that are contemporaneous with craniodental remains of A. garhi.
The femur is elongated relative to the humerus, as in Homo sapiens, but, unlike the human forearm, that of the fossil specimen is relatively long.
Thus, by 2.5 mya at least one hominin species had developed the long femurs of striding bipeds, though it retained long forearms like arboreally active Australopithecus and Paranthropus.
H. habilis (2.0–1.5 mya), best known from Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, exhibits small teeth and a large brain, but it has long upper limbs (especially the forearms), short femurs, curved finger bones, and other chimpanzee-like traits that indicate a mélange of arboreal and terrestrial adaptations.
Because of these similarities, some investigators classify H. habilis as A. habilis.
The pelvis of H. heidelbergensis (600,000–200,000 years ago, or 600–200 kya) and that of Neanderthals (200–30 kya) are distinct from the pelvis of H. sapiens in some features that recall those of Australopithecus.
The pelvis is broad, with ilia flaring out to the side.
The femoral necks are also relatively long.
These features help stabilize the pelvis in stocky bipedal hominins.
The pelvises of both H. heidelbergensis and Neanderthals could accommodate a wider birth canal.
This feature is important because they may have had notably larger brains (about 1,200 grams [2.65 pounds] and 1,400 grams [3.09 pounds], respectively) than earlier hominins did - a trait that is reflected in the size of the fetal skull.
Regrettably, development of foot structure in early Homo - that is, between A. afarensis and Neanderthals - is virtually undocumented by skeletal evidence.
The oldest footprints suggestive of contemporary foot function, however, have been found in Ileret, Kenya.
These prints have been dated at 1.51 to 1.53 mya, and their size and depth suggest that they were made by H. ergaster or H. erectus.
Therefore, it is safe to assume that by about 1.53 mya the uniquely human locomotor and associated cooling systems were basically established.
Subsequent alterations in pelvic shape may be related to the passage of larger-brained babies through the birth canal.
There are many theories that attempt to explain why humans are bipedal, but none is wholly satisfactory.
Increased speed can be ruled out immediately because humans are not very fast runners.
Because bipedalism leaves the hands free, some scientists, including Darwin, linked it to tool use, especially tools for defense and hunting - that is to say, weapons.
This theory is problematic in that the earliest stone artifacts date only to about 2.6 mya, long after hominins had become bipedal, thus requiring an assumption that earlier tools were made of wood or other perishable materials.
Twentieth-century theories proposed a wide array of other factors that might have driven the evolution of hominin bipedalism: carrying objects, wading to forage for aquatic foods and to avoid shoreline predators, vigilantly standing in tall grass, following migrant herds on the savanna, and conserving energy (bipedalism expends less energy than quadrupedism).
Furthermore, if the early bipeds were regularly exposed to direct midday tropical sunlight, they would further benefit in two ways from standing upright: less body surface would be exposed to damaging solar rays, and they would find relief in the cooler air above the ground.
Some scientists assume that the pre-bipedal primates were terrestrial quadrupeds, perhaps even knuckle-walkers like modern-day chimpanzees, bonobos, and gorillas.
Conversely, it is also possible that the first habitual walkers were already well prepared for bipedal movement along the ground, having adaptations for running bipedally among branches and boughs, standing upright to forage overhead, and climbing vertical tree trunks and vines.
This scenario is suggested by studies of gibbons, which routinely engage in these arboreal activities and virtually never elect to move on the forest floor but, if forced to the ground, run bipedally.
Gibbons have relatively long, powerful lower limbs and the same number of lumbar vertebrae that humans have (great apes have fewer).
The chests of gibbons are configured similarly to those of humanoids.
When walking on the ground, gibbons stand up straighter than chimpanzees, which are occasionally bipedal.
Moreover, gibbons exert less energy running on the ground than when running along branches or climbing vertically.
A gibbon mother (right) walks with her baby at the Beijing Zoo.
When traveling on the ground, the gibbon often walks upright with its long arms held above the head for balance.
Adopting a bipedal stance with full extension of the lower limbs thus would not have been a major challenge, since all apes have this capacity, though there would have been some alteration of the lower limb bones, joints, and ligaments.
The foot would probably have gone through the most dramatic change, from a prehensile organ to a heel-supported, propellant one.
Increased size and frequent, sustained erect standing on extended lower limbs in order to forage overhanging branches in woodland, thicket, forest edge, and other relatively open habitats would favor the evolution of humanoid hip, knee, and foot structure.
While consuming their harvests, bipedal foragers may have squatted often, thereby further selecting for robust heels and for weight distribution between the heel and forefoot and between closely placed feet.
Frequent squatting and rising would enhance development of the hamstring, buttock, and anterior thigh muscles (as hip and knee extensors), which are vital for athletic bipedalism.
Stretching upward would select for shorter toes and an arched foot.
Simply increasing body size would increase locomotor efficiency, because larger animals can more effectively use the elastic energy of tendons and muscles, and they also take fewer strides to cover a given distance than a smaller animal would.
Indeed, Homo rudolfensis (2.4–1.6 mya), H. ergaster (1.9–1.7 mya), and later species of Homo, including H. sapiens (about 200 kya), are notably taller and heavier than Australopithecus and Paranthropus.
There is less size difference between the sexes in Homo species than in many other primates, largely because the females have become larger.
Average size in male Australopithecus (90–112 pounds [41–51 kg]) and Paranthropus (88–108 pounds [40–49 kg]) is comparable to that of male chimpanzees (108 pounds [49 kg]).
The relatively smaller size of females indicates that there was more sexual dimorphism (difference between the sexes in size or appearance) in these hominins than there is in chimpanzees.
Sexual dimorphism in H. rudolfensis (132 versus 112 pounds [60 versus 51 kg]) and H. ergaster (145 versus 123 pounds [66 versus 56 kg]) is comparable to that in H. sapiens (128 versus 108 pounds [58 versus 49 kg]).
Homo rudolfensis and H. ergaster (1.9–1.5 mya) have long femurs of modern human configuration and internal knee structure like that of H. sapiens.
Both structures are quite unlike those of chimpanzees and at least some of the smaller tree-climbing primates.
This may have been the time also when the distinctive form of the human calf muscle evolved.
Unlike those of great apes, the human calf muscle has many tendons; this enables its springlike motion during walking and running.
This artist's conception of four stages of human evolution highlights key differences in skull and facial shape.
Shown (from left to right) are representations of Australopithicus, Homo habilis, H. erectus, and H. sapiens.
The unique epidermal and respiratory mechanisms of Homo sapiens may also have developed in conjunction with regular trekking, sprinting, and endurance running as ancestral Homo secured a foothold in open tropical and subtropical environments.
There is a rich concentration of sweat glands in our scalp (apes have few or none in theirs), which helps to cool the head, especially the brain, in high temperatures and during vigorous activity.
Our abundantly vascular, highly sensitive, and sparsely haired skin is greatly endowed with sweat glands, whose copious secretions cool an extensive surface by evaporation.
The distribution of sweat glands is especially strategic for cooling us while running: there is a greater concentration of sweat glands on the front surfaces of the torso and limbs, against which the air passes as we move forward.
Consequently, unlike hairy quadrupeds, we do not have to pause to pant in order to avoid overheating.
Homo ergaster (1.9–1.5 mya), an African species, is the earliest hominin documented with a human thoracic (upper body) shape. (
This species is classified by some paleoanthropologists as an African subgroup of H. erectus.)
The thorax of Neanderthals (H. neanderthalensis) is also essentially like that of H. sapiens, but those of other species of Homo are not known.
The earlier section “Roots in the Miocene” describes certain global climatic changes that reduced forested areas and induced more open terrestrial biomes during the late Miocene Epoch (11.2–5.3 mya).
During the succeeding Pliocene Epoch (5.3–2.6 mya), these changes only intensified.
In Africa, primates diversified.
In contrast, hominins in Eurasia disappeared by the beginning of the Pliocene.
The only descendants of Late Miocene primates in Asia are the extinct Early-Middle Pleistocene Gigantopithecus blacki of southern China and northern Vietnam and the present-day orangutans and gibbons of South and Southeast Asia.
This map indicates the major sites of fossil finds of Australopithecus and Homo sapiens in Africa.
It is reasonable to expect that the increased variety and shifting distribution of African biomes stimulated new hominin lifeways, some of which led to survival and others of which did not.
Insofar as habitats have been (or can be) discerned from evidence found with the Pliocene hominin species, hominins inhabited a variety of biomes in eastern, central, and southern Africa.
In central Ethiopia, Ardipithecus ramidus is associated with faunal and floral remains indicating a woodland habitat.
Later remains, in northern Ethiopia, indicate Australopithecus afarensis inhabited a mosaic of riverine forest, lowland woodland, savanna, and dry bushland.
In northern Kenya, Australopithecus anamensis lived in dry open woodland or bushland with a forest along a nearby river.
In central Chad, the northernmost and westernmost species, Australopithecus bahrelghazali, appears to have lived in a mosaic of open and wooded biomes near a river.
Mammalian fossils from Lomekwi, northern Kenya, indicate that Kenyanthropus platyops inhabited a relatively well-watered area of forest or closed woodland or the forest edge between them.
The habitat of the 3.5-million-year-old Laetoli hominins in northern Tanzania was arguably a mosaic of open grassland and more-closed woodland.
The area may have been wetter than it is now.
No permanent water source has been identified for the Laetoli area during the Pliocene.
Later in the Pliocene, Australopithecus garhi was active on broad, grassy plains bordering a lake in central Ethiopia.
Models of the habitat of Australopithecus africanus, based on fauna from the two major South African cave sites - Sterkfontein and Makapansgat - stress closed-canopy wooded conditions: either dry woodland with grasslands nearby or subtropical forest.
During the tenures of Homo habilis and Paranthropus boisei at Olduvai Gorge, northern Tanzania, the climate changed from moist to dry and again to moist before a long dry span that began two million years ago.
Specimens of both Olduvai hominins are mostly from the shore of an ancient lake.
At Koobi Fora, northern Kenya, specimens of H. habilis have been more commonly found in lake-margin deposits; those of P. boisei are equally common in river and lake-margin sediments.
Fossil pollen indicates that highland forest was nearby and that near the lake there were grassy areas and dense woodland and shrubland.
The earliest fossils of human ancestors have been found in Africa.
This map also shows important hominid excavation sites in Europe, Asia, and Australia.
At Konso, southern Ethiopia, P. boisei lived in a grassland habitat.
Elsewhere in eastern Africa, P. aethiopicus was associated with closed habitats.
The South African cave sites (Swartkrans, Kromdraai, and Drimolen) of P. robustus are associated with open and even arid habitats, but these may not reflect its actual foraging preference.
One of the more profound effects of Pliocene habitat changes was increased efficiency in the bipedal stride at the time that Homo species moved out of Africa and into Eurasia.
Shortly after Homo evolved in Africa, some species ventured to temperate biomes in Eurasia and then to subtropical and tropical biomes in South and Southeast Asia.
Subsequently there was a migration back to Africa, perhaps as early as 1.8–0.9 mya.
The dispersion of Homo across the Eastern Hemisphere is associated with elaboration of stone tool kits, increased brain size, and reduction in size of the jaws and teeth - all of which are the subject of this chapter.
Primates are hand-to-mouth feeders that pluck and catch items selectively by hand before ingesting them.
Without tools, emergent hominins would have relied on the versatility and strength of their hands to collect food and on their teeth and jaws alone to process it.
Unless they used tools to fashion carrying devices such as bags from animal skins, they would have needed a reliable source of water nearby; they would also have been limited in the types and number of objects that they could transport through their range.
In addition to transporting objects and water, there is the more obvious utility of animal skins in protecting against night chills, rain, and strong sunshine.
Sharp-edged stones, even small flakes, would be a boon to early hominins who learned how to select and make them for cutting hides, meat, sticks, and other plant material.
Stones also would assist in pounding open hard-shelled fruits and nuts, bones for marrow, and skulls for brains.
There may have been a span when early hominins used naturally occurring stones and other objects as tools and weapons, much as some wild chimpanzees do today.
Before hominins controlled fire and either built sturdy shelters on the ground or effectively defended caves and rock shelters, they may have constructed platforms in trees for daily activities as well as night lodging.
Raw materials, stone hammers, cutting tools, and sticks and stones for defense could be stored in the trees to be used repeatedly.
Handheld rocks, clubs, and long stabbing sticks, spears, or other missiles would constitute a formidable defense, especially if employed from the vantage of a tree platform.
By about 2.6 million years ago, some hominins were making and using simple stone artifacts in eastern Africa.
A likely candidate for this practice is Homo habilis, though its contemporaries Paranthropus boisei and Australopithecus garhi cannot be overruled for this distinction.
Indeed, at Bouri, Ethiopia, mammalian bones that were cut and pounded by stone tools occur in 2.5-million-year-old sediments that also yield fossils of A. garhi.
Because the earliest stone artifacts were of such simple construction and because chimpanzees, orangutans, and capuchin monkeys today can employ stones, stems, vines, and sticks to extract nutritious morsels from protective covers, one need not expect that early hominin toolmakers displayed modern hand structure and exquisite motor control.
Nonetheless, the unique structure of the human hand is readily explained by a substantial history of producing and using increasingly complex tool kits and other artifacts.
The human hand has a fully opposable thumb, which means it is capable of being placed against one or more of the remaining digits of the hand.
An opposable thumb gives the hand a unique power grip (left) and a precision grip (right).
The features of human hands are easily distinguishable from those of the great apes, and they underpin our refined manipulatory abilities.
The most complex adaptations of the human hand involve the thumb, powered by the unique and fully independent flexor pollicis longus muscle.
It is this muscle that gives the thumb its remarkable strength in pinch and power grips.
The fingertips are broad and equipped with highly sensitive pads of skin.
The proportional lengths of the thumb and other fingers give us an opposable thumb with precise, firm contact between its tip and the ends of each of the other fingers.
A special saddle joint and associated ligaments at the base of the thumb facilitate refined rotation.
Special configurations of joints at the bases of the fifth, fourth, and second fingers facilitate tip-to-tip precision grips with the thumb.
Asymmetry of the heads of the second and fifth palm bones induces rotation of the articulated fingers during opposition with the thumb.
Finally, numerous modifications of the small muscles in the hand are associated with fine control of the thumb and fingers.
This illustration depicts the carpal bones of a primitive humanoid (left) and a human (right).
The eight carpal bones of a human hand make up the wrist (carpus).
Australopithecus afarensis is the earliest hominin species for which there are sufficient fossil hand bones to assess the capabilities for manipulation.
The hand bones were capable of gripping sticks and stones firmly for vigorous pounding and throwing.
However, they lacked a fully developed human power grip that would allow cylindrical objects to be held between the partly flexed fingers and the palm, with counterpressure being applied by the thumb.
There are insufficient specimens to assess fine manipulation in Australopithecus, but there is no reason to believe that they were less capable than modern chimpanzees.
Chimpanzees and other apes have remarkable precision of grip, even though the tapered thumb tip must be pressed against the side of the index finger and cannot be apposed securely to any of the fingertips.
Hand bones assigned to a 1.8-million-year-old specimen of Homo habilis from Olduvai Gorge in northern Tanzania represent an advance over those of Australopithecus afarensis in features related to tool use.
Tools similar to those found at Olduvai are found associated with H. habilis from other parts of eastern Africa as well.
The tips of its thumb and fingers were flat, and there is evidence for a strong flexor pollicis longus muscle and a saddle joint at the base of the thumb.
Hand bones arguably assigned to Paranthropus robustus or Homo from Swartkrans, South Africa, confirm that by about 1.8 mya one or more hominin species had highly developed thumbs and flat fingertips.
Hominin hand bones from 2.8–2.5-million-year-old cave deposits at Sterkfontein, South Africa, may be evidence that the hands of A. africanus were somewhat more advanced for stone tool use, but no artifact has been found in association with them.
Younger Sterkfontein deposits (2.0–1.5 mya) contain stone artifacts and remains of a Homo species.
Because of an absence of fossils, it is not possible to track certain refinements in hand structure that must have evolved in conjunction with innovations in tool manufacture and use during the heydays of H. rudolfensis, H. ergaster (1.9–1.5 mya), and H. erectus (1.7–0.2 mya), as well as H. antecessor (1.0–0.8 mya) and H. heidelbergensis (600–200 kya).
Only prehistoric and modern H. sapiens and H. neanderthalensis are fully represented by hand skeletons.
Because more complete fossil heads than hands are available, it is easier to model increased brain size in parallel with the rich record of artifacts from the Paleolithic Period (ca.
2,500,000 to 10,000 years ago), popularly known as the Old Stone Age.
The Paleolithic preceded the Middle Stone Age, or Mesolithic Period; this nomenclature sometimes causes confusion, as the Paleolithic itself is divided into Early, Middle, and Late periods.
Hominin brain expansion tracks so closely with improved tool technology that some scholars ignore other factors that may have contributed to the brain’s increasing size, such as social complexity and changes in foraging strategies.
This graph shows the increase in hominin cranial capacities over time.
Advances in tool use, dietary changes, and other factors are thought to have fueled evolutionary growth in hominin brain size.
Throughout human evolution, the brain has continued to expand.
Estimated average brain masses of A. afarensis (0.96 pound [435 grams]), A. garhi (0.98 pound [445 grams]), A. africanus (0.99 pound [450 grams]), P. boisei (1.13 pounds [515 grams]), and P. robustus (1.16 pounds [525 grams]) are close to those of chimpanzees (0.87 pound [395 grams]) and gorillas (1.08 pounds [490 grams]).
Average brain mass of H. sapiens is 2.97 pounds (1,350 grams).
The increase appears to have begun with H. habilis (1.32 pounds [600 grams]), which is also notable for having a small body.
The trend in brain enlargement continued in Africa with larger-bodied H. rudolfensis (1.62 pounds [735 grams]) and especially H. ergaster (1.87 pounds [850 grams]).
One must be extremely cautious about ascribing greater cognitive capabilities to brain mass, however.
Relative to estimated body mass, H. habilis is actually “brainier” than H. rudolfensis and H. ergaster.
A similar interpretive challenge is presented by Neanderthals versus modern humans.
Neanderthals had larger brains than earlier Homo species, indeed rivaling those of modern humans.
Relative to body mass, however, Neanderthals are less brainy than anatomically modern humans.
Relative brain size of Homo did not change from 1.8 to 0.6 mya.
After about 600 kya it increased until about 35,000 years ago, when it began to decrease.
Worldwide, average body size also decreased in Homo sapiens from 35,000 years ago until very recently, when economically advanced peoples began to grow larger while less-privileged peoples did not.
Overall, there were periods of stagnation and elaboration in stone tool technology during the Paleolithic, but, because of variations over time and between locations as well as the possibility that plant materials were used instead of stone, it is impossible to link brain size with technological complexity and fully human cognitive capabilities.
Moreover, in many instances it is impossible to identify assuredly the hominin species that commanded a Paleolithic industry, even when there are associated skeletal remains at the site.
The unreliability of brain size to predict cognitive competence and ability to survive in challenging environments is underscored by the discovery of a distinctive human sample, dubbed Homo floresiensis, in a limestone cave on Flores Island, Indonesia, in 2003.
The diminutive H. floresiensis had brains similar in mass to those of chimpanzees and small australopiths, yet produced a stone tool industry comparable to that of Early Pleistocene hominins and, according to many scientists, survived among giant rats, dwarf elephants, and Komodo dragons from at least 38 kya to about 18 kya.
If they are indeed a distinct species, they constitute yet another archaic human (in addition to H. neanderthalensis and perhaps H. erectus) that lived contemporaneously with modern humans during the Late Pleistocene.
Researchers of the Liang Bua cave on Flores published a new study in 2016 about H. floresiensis, arguing that the fossils are between 100,000 and 60,000 years old.
A skull of Homo floresiensis (left) is displayed next to a modern human’s skull.
The H. floresiensis skull was discovered on Flores Island in 2003.
H. floresiensis is nicknamed the “hobbit species” because of its petite size.
HOMO FLORESIENSIS: THE HOBBIT-LIKE HOMININ
Homo floresiensis is an extinct hominin that until quite recently was presumed by some scientists to have lived on the Indonesian island of Flores as recently as 18,000 years ago, well within the time range of modern humans.
However, in 2016, researchers studying the fossils and excavations at the Liang Bua cave revised the estimated time span of this species, proposing that H. floresiensis could have lived between 100,000 and 60,000 years ago.
The team of researchers employed stratigraphy, radiocarbon dating, luminescence dating, uranium-series dating, and even argon-argon dating to confirm that the skeletal fossils were in deposits that can be dated in the revised time period.
The stone artifacts connected with the human remains can be dated between 190,000 to 50,000 years old.
These findings have led the researchers to suggest that H. floresiensis is similar to the older human species H. erectus, disproving the notion that H. floresiensis was descended from the modern H. sapiens.
The latter did not come to this geographical area until about 50,000 years ago.
The two species might have interacted, but the earliest evidence of H. sapiens on Flores is from nearly 11,000 years ago, long after H. floresiensis went extinct.
Scientists and workers excavate skeletal fossils at Liang Bua cave on Flores Island in 2009.
The Homo floresiensis fossils uncovered there are estimated to be between 100,000 and 60,000 years old.
The investigation centers around the skeletal remains of an adult female and other individuals found at the Liang Bua cave in 2003 by a team of Australian and Indonesian anthropologists.
An initial analysis of the remains indicated that H. floresiensis stood only some 40 inches (100 cm) tall and had long arms and a skull with a cranial capacity of a mere 380 cc, comparable to that of a modern chimpanzee.
However, the delicate skeletal bones, nonprojecting face, and reduced dentition placed them squarely within the human family.
On the basis of these findings, the hominin’s discoverers classified it as a distinct species of the genus Homo and theorized that it may have descended from H. erectus, a much older and larger hominin that may also be the ancestor of modern humans.
It was further hypothesized that the diminutive size of H. floresiensis may have been caused by island dwarfing (also called endemic dwarfing), a process whereby some creatures confined to isolated habitats such as islands are known to have become smaller over time.
Such dwarfing has never been seen in the remains of other members of the human family, which show that stature and brain size have generally increased from the earliest hominins up to modern humans.
Public curiosity about the new species abounded, and, in homage to a short-statured race in J.R.R. Tolkien’s novels, it was soon dubbed “hobbit-like.”
However, the initial analysis of the find and the dwarfing hypothesis were immediately challenged by the scholarly community.
Some subsequent examinations of the remains contradicted the original conclusions, suggesting instead that they represent a population of modern humans that was quite gracile (slender) but of normal height.
In contrast, other investigations, which compared the specimen’s gait, foot size, and skull size to that of modern humans, suggested that the remains belong to a new species, perhaps one that descended from an ancestor more primitive than H. erectus.
In Africa, the Early Paleolithic (2.5–0.2 mya) comprises several industries with the earliest man-made chipped flakes and core choppers (2.5–2.1 mya).
Double-faced hand axes, cleavers, and picks (collectively known as bifaces) appeared about 1.5 mya and persisted until about 200 kya.
Archaeologists have detected some improvements of technique and product during the half-million-year span of core-flake industries.
Although the major biface industry - the Acheulean - has been characterized as basically static, it too shows evidence of refinement over time, finally resulting in elegant, symmetrical hand axes that required notable skill to make.
By 1.7 mya, a population of H. erectus similar to African H. ergaster lived in Eurasia at what is now Dmanisi, Georgia.
The associated choppers, chopping tools, flakes, and scrapers recall the Oldowan core-flake industry of eastern Africa, but there are no bifaces among them.
The braincase of the two Dmanisi specimens is smaller than that of African H. ergaster.
New geochemical dates for classic hominin localities in Java indicate that H. erectus may have lived in Southeast Asia 1.5 mya, but no industry is certainly identified with them.
The Acheulean stone tool industry, as the standardized tradition of toolmaking by Homo erectus and early Homo sapiens is known, included ovaland pear-shaped hand axes that had relatively straight edges.
El ‘Ubeidīya, Israel, provides evidence that people and bifaces had spread out of Africa by 1.4 mya.
In Europe, Acheulean tools appear 500 kya and persist until about 250–150 kya; they also occur in South Asia.
Sites in China (800 kya), Korea, and Japan contain bifaces, but they differ from Acheulean tools.
No such technology has been found in tropical Southeast Asia, where bamboo tools may have sufficed.
In both Africa and Eurasia, the Middle Paleolithic was long thought to have lasted from about 200 kya to as recently as 30 kya, depending upon location.
While tools from the Early Paleolithic slowly changed across space and time, the Middle Paleolithic was characterized by an explosion of local and regional variations in size and shape and by frequencies of reshaped flakes, blades, scrapers, hand axes, and other tools.
Projectile points began to be emphasized in some regions, with bone being used as well as stone; bone arrow points dating to more than 60,000 years ago have been found at Sibudu Cave in South Africa.
Although they vary across time and space, Middle Paleolithic tools as a whole are characterized by carefully prepared cores from which elegant flakes or blades were struck.
Notably, tools of this type have been found at the Gademotta site in Ethiopia’s Rift Valley in stratigraphic levels that date to approximately 275 kya.
This find not only challenges the common starting date for the Middle Paleolithic but also raises intriguing questions about the Gademotta tool makers.
Fossil remains of fully modern humans do not appear in the archaeological record until about 200 kya, suggesting that these tools were either made by another species or that fully modern humans arose much earlier than was once thought.
Late Paleolithic industries dating to 50–10 kya comprise diverse blade and microblade tools, especially in Europe.
Late Paleolithic peoples used a variety of materials for their tools and bodily ornaments, including bone, stone, wood, antler, ivory, and shell.
Stone blades were long, thin, and very effective cutting tools.
Often, when they became dull, someone retouched them via pressure flaking, which requires fine motor control and coordination.
Microblades and other points were probably hafted to produce throwing and stabbing spears.
Other composite tools of the period include atlatls, harpoons, fish weirs, and bows and arrows.
Late Paleolithic people also developed techniques for grinding and polishing, with which they made beads, pendants, and other artistic objects.
They also made needles (perhaps for sewing fitted clothing), fishhooks, and fish gorges.
The combined effects of improved cutting, pounding, and grinding tools and techniques and the use of fire for cooking surely contributed to a documented reduction in the size of hominin jaws and teeth over the past 2.5 to 5 million years, but it is impossible to relate them precisely.
It is not known when hominins gained control over fire or which species may have employed it thereafter for food preparation, warmth, or protection against predators.
It is very difficult to discern whether a fire was deliberately produced by hominins or occurred naturally.
For example, in a wildfire, burned-out tree stumps might leave circular accumulations of charcoal residue that could be mistaken for hearths, whereas campfires built by mobile hominins would leave no lasting evidence.
Concentrations of charcoal, burned bones, seeds, and artifacts in China and France suggest that H. erectus, H. heidelbergensis, or both used fire as early as 460 kya.
Certainly some Middle and Late Paleolithic peoples controlled fire, but hearths are rare until 100 kya.
If claims for control of fire in South Africa 1.5 mya are confirmed, P. robustus or H. ergaster would be the first fire keepers.
At first glance, early hominin skulls appear to be more like those of apes than humans.
Whereas humans have small jaws and a large braincase, great apes have a small braincase and large jaws.
In addition, the canine teeth of apes are large and pointed and project beyond the other teeth, whereas those of humans are relatively small and nonprojecting.
Indeed, human canines are unique in being incisorlike, and the front lower premolar tooth is bicuspid.
In apes and in many monkeys, however, the lower premolar is unicuspid and hones the upper canine tooth to razor sharpness.
A comparison of jaws and teeth shows that the jaws and teeth of Australopithecus afarensis (center) more closely resembled those of a chimpanzee (top) than those of a modern human (bottom).
In male Australopithecus and Paranthropus, the large chewing muscles needed to power their deep, robust jaws were attached to prominent crests on the braincase and to flaring arches of bone on the face and sides of the skull.
Over time the rear teeth of Paranthropus increased in size while the incisors and canines shrank.
Accordingly, P. robustus and P. boisei have relatively flat faces and nonprotruding jaws.
Australopithecus species also had large rear teeth, but their faces were more protruding because the incisors and canines were not as reduced as those of Paranthropus.
Over time the rear teeth progressively increased in size from A. anamensis to A. africanus and H. habilis, with A. afarenis intermediate between A. anamensis and the younger species of Australopithecus.
When compared with estimated body size, the pattern of increased tooth size over time is confirmed for Paranthropus.
Tooth wear patterns in A. afarensis indicate that it may have stripped vegetal foods by manually pulling them across the front teeth.
The robust-skulled Paranthropus may have eaten tougher foods than did the gracile-skulled Australopithecus.
Additionally, some paleoanthropologists believe that Paranthropus was vegetarian, while A. africanus had more meat in its diet.
Dental morphology and wear patterns indicate that in South Africa P. robustus ate hard foods and that Kenyan P. boisei chewed whole pods and fruits with hard coatings and tough seeds, though they probably did not chew quantities of grass seed, leaves, or bone.
Unlike those of Paranthropus and Australopithecus, the teeth of Homo became smaller over time.
H. rudolfensis has large rear teeth, even relative to estimated body size, but the dentition of H. ergaster approaches the modern human condition.
Concomitantly, the face of H. rudolfensis is more like that of Australopithecus than H. ergaster.
One expects this trend to be related somehow to changes in diet or techniques of food preparation, but evidence to support this link is not available in the archaeological record.
To date, precise evolutionary relationships among Australopithecus, Kenyanthropus, Paranthropus, and the direct ancestors of Homo are unknown.
Because of its early date and geographic location, A. anamensis may be the common ancestor of A. afarensis, A. garhi, K. platyops, and perhaps the Laetoli Pliocene hominins of eastern Africa, A. bahrelghazali of central Africa, and A. africanus of southern Africa.
A. afarensis may be ancestral to P. aethiopicus, which begat P. boisei in eastern Africa and P. robustus in southern Africa.
Factors indicating H. rudolfensis as ancestral to later species of Homo are its absolute brain size, large body, and lower limb morphology.
These features clearly foreshadow younger species of Homo in Africa and Eurasia.
However, a mandible discovered in the Ledi-Geraru area of the Awash River valley in 2013 may point toward a different ancestor - one that clearly belongs to the genus Homo.
The mandible provides evidence that dental features associated with later Homo (such as smaller teeth and a much-reduced chin) appeared as early as 2.8 million years ago, well in advance of the advent of H. rudolfensis.
While some paleontologists have been quick to associate the specimen with H. habilis, others are considering the possibility that it belongs to a new species of Homo.
American anthropologist Brian Villmoare holds a replica of the Ledi-Geraru mandible (jawbone), which was dated as about 2.8 million years old.
It was heralded as the oldest fossil that can be associated with the genus Homo.
The original fossil was discovered in Ethiopia.
Our ancestry becomes no clearer as the candidates are narrowed to Homo species exclusively.
Among paleoanthropologists who accept it as a species distinct from H. erectus, H. ergaster is most often proposed as the ancestor of Homo species of the Pleistocene Epoch.
H. heidelbergensis may have arisen from H. ergaster, H. erectus, or H. antecessor, and any or none of them could have been ancestors of H. neanderthalensis and Homo sapiens.
Neanderthal populations, particularly as represented by specimens from western Europe, probably were not ancestral to modern humans.
Theorists use fossil remains, genetic traits of modern people around the world, and archaeological and anatomical indicators of cognitive, linguistic, and technological capabilities to support their models of recent human evolution.
However, no single theory provides a definitive explanation of how Homo sapiens came to be.
The limitations of empirical evidence confound efforts to discern whether distinctive features and lineages developed gradually or over periods of stasis punctuated by rapid change (a theory known as punctuated equilibrium).
There are claims for about twenty fossil hominin species over the course of the last six million years, but they are assessed on a case-by-case basis.
For example, it appears that Neanderthals (H. neanderthalensis) were a dead end for two ancestral species (H. antecessor and H. heidelbergensis) that changed gradually in Europe from about 700 kya to 30 kya.
Homo sapiens may have evolved similarly through a series of species represented by African specimens, but some theorists envision a dramatic shift in cognitive capacity and behavior that qualifies instead as a punctuational change.
This change would have occurred about 200 kya in one small African population and would have been followed by a long period of stasis that continues to the present.
Such a scenario is not unprecedented, as A. afarensis was a capable biped that appears to have emerged suddenly and persisted for nearly one million years.
This map shows the sites where fossils of Homo heidelbergensis and Homo sapiens have been found in Africa, Europe, and Asia.
H. sapiens first appeared in Africa about 200,000 years ago, and by 45,000 years ago had begun to settle in Europe.
There are four basic models that purport to explain the evolution of Homo sapiens between about 200 and 30 kya.
At one extreme is multiregional evolution, or the regional continuity model.
At the other is the African replacement, or “out of Africa,” model.
Intermediate are the African hybridization-and-replacement model and the assimilation model.
All but the multiregional model maintain that Homo sapiens evolved solely in Africa about 200 kya and then deployed to Eurasia and eventually the Americas and Oceania.
Both of the replacement models argue that anatomically modern emigrants replaced resident Eurasian and Australasian species of Homo sapiens with little or no hybridization.
The hybridization-and-replacement model proposes some interbreeding with archaic indigenous populations but with relatively minor effects.
Assimilation maintains continuity between archaic and modern humans, most notably in some areas of Eurasia.
In this model, unity of the species was maintained by periodic interbreeding across wide areas.
Multiregionalists reject the idea that Homo sapiens evolved uniquely in Africa.
Instead, they advocate that discrete archaic populations of Homo evolved locally in Africa, Asia, and Europe.
Throughout their tenures, both the archaic and descendant populations interbred with contemporaries from other areas.
The African replacement model has gained the widest acceptance owing mainly to genetic data (particularly mitochondrial DNA) from existing populations.
This model is consistent with the realization that modern humans cannot be classified into subspecies or races, and it recognizes that all populations of present-day humans share the same potential.
Such a tangled line of descent is not surprising given the nomadic lifestyles enabled by bipedalism.
There appear to have been successive migrations of hominin species out of Africa, with evolution of new species in Eurasia and occasional migrations back into Africa.
For instance, H. ergaster may have been the first hominin to reach Eurasia.
Some of its descendants could have moved quickly to East and Southeast Asia, where they begat H. erectus.
Others may have evolved into H. heidelbergensis, which populated Europe sparsely and then returned to Africa.
Some paleoanthropologists claim that H. antecessor, found in 800,000-year-old cave deposits at Gran Dolina, Sierra de Atapuerca, Spain, was a direct ancestor of H. neanderthalensis via H. heidelbergensis, which is represented by 300,000-year-old specimens from Sima de los Huesos in the Sierra de Atapuerca.
Further, they propose that H. antecessor, from million-year-old deposits in Eritrea, is a direct ancestor of Homo sapiens in Africa.
Neanderthals probably evolved in Europe at least partially in response to cold climatic conditions and then migrated to western Asia, where they may have encountered Homo sapiens in the Levant (coastal areas along the eastern Mediterranean shores).
There is no skeletal evidence that they reached the African continent or moved much farther east than Uzbekistan in Central Asia.
The stocky torsos, short limbs (particularly the forearms and legs), and distinctive facial structure of Neanderthals strongly suggest adaptation to seasonally frigid biomes.
The middle of the face protrudes, the teeth are set forward, the enlarged cheekbones sweep backward, and the nasal passages are voluminous.
If Neanderthals wore animal furs and other insulating materials on their heads and bodies while keeping vigorously active in frigid weather, the large nasal chamber would help to cool the blood and prevent overheating the brain, while clothing would reduce the risk of frostbite.
The nasal chamber might also conserve moisture during exhalation.
The Museum of Human Evolution in Burgos, Spain, exhibits this model of what scientists believe Homo neanderthalensis might have looked like.
Neanderthals probably had broad shoulders, large chests, strong legs, and broad, strong feet.
Fossil specimens obtained from the Omo site in Ethiopia (which have been dated to 195 kya) indicate that anatomically modern Homo sapiens were present sometime around 200 kya in eastern Africa.
Molecular genetic data suggest that early Homo sapiens passed through a population bottleneck - that is, a period when they were rare creatures - before rapidly spreading throughout the Old World.
In addition to debate about when and which paths Homo sapiens took when they left Africa, researchers also are uncertain about whether human migration from the continent happened in one wave or multiple waves.
Support for a single migratory wave out of Africa comes most convincingly from genetic studies analyzing the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) of Homo sapiens. (
Because mtDNA is passed on from mother to child, researchers can trace genetic similarities down a single line of ancestors for many generations.)
These studies have indicated that about 65 kya, anatomically modern humans set out from Africa, probably following a southern coastal route toward Asia.
Scientists have also compared the DNA of modern-day humans with genetic material recovered from fossils of Denisovans––an ancient group of hominins named for Denisova Cave in the Altai Mountains of Russia, where they were first discovered.
These comparisons suggest that after anatomically modern humans left Africa, different populations then dispersed, migrating in multiple waves into South and East Asia.
Dispersal from Africa to Europe may have occurred in separate, later migration.
In 2008, Russian scientists excavating Denisova Cave unearthed a fingerbone fragment of a juvenile female, called X woman, which was a then unknown hominin species.
Artifacts of Homo sapiens and H. neanderthalensis were also found in the cave.
DENISOVA CAVE
Denisova Cave is a site of paleoanthropological excavations in the Anui River valley roughly 60 miles (100 km) south of Biysk in the Altai Mountains of Russia.
The cave contains more than twenty layers of excavated artifacts indicating occupation by hominins as long ago as 280,000 years before the present to as recently as the Middle Ages.
Evidence of thirteen separate occupations occurring between 125,000 and 30,000 years ago is supported by the presence of artifacts from the Acheulean, Mousterian, and Levalloisian stone-flaking industries.
Researchers maintain that the cave was inhabited by early modern humans (Homo sapiens) and possibly Neanderthals (H. neanderthalensis) at different times.
In addition, researchers discovered evidence of occupation by a previously unknown group of hominins, dubbed the Denisovans, who were neither modern humans nor Neanderthals.
The cave is known locally as Aju-Tasch, which means “bear rock” in Russian.
In 2010, a group of European and American scientists reported the sequencing of the complete mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) genome obtained from a specimen found in the Denisova Cave in 2008. (
Mitochondrial DNA is taken from the mitochondria rather than from the nuclei of extracted cells.)
The specimen, a finger bone from what was thought to be a small child, was dated to between 30,000 and 48,000 years ago.
Despite the specimen’s association with artifacts traditionally associated with Neanderthals, its mtDNA showed nearly twice as many differences from modern human mtDNA than are shown in Neanderthal mtDNA.
These findings indicated that the Denisovan lineage branched off from some common ancestor well before the lineage that includes Neanderthals and modern humans.
The most recent common mtDNA that could have been shared by these two lineages would have occurred roughly one million years ago.
Consequently, the researchers have suggested that Neanderthals, H. sapiens, and the genetically distinct Denisovan hominins inhabited the Altai region at the same time some 40,000 years ago.
Paleoanthropologists excavate the Denisova Cave in the Altai Mountains, Russia.
The hominid bone fragments discovered there were from a group of hominins who were genetically different from Neanderthals and modern humans.
In another study published the same year, nuclear DNA from the same finger bone was used to sequence the Denisovan nuclear genome.
Genetic analysis, determined that the finger bone as well as a tooth excavated from the cave in 2000 belonged to two different, but genetically similar, individuals and that these individuals had significant genetic differences from Neanderthals and modern humans.
In addition, the tooth possessed structural features that did not occur in those species.
A comparison of the Denisovan nuclear genome with those of Neanderthals and modern humans suggested that possibly 4 to 6 percent of the material in the Denisovan genome also occurred in the genomes of modern humans from Melanesia.
Such findings implied that the Denisovans appeared throughout large parts of Eurasia and that they interbred with early modern humans.
A 2016 report further determined that Homo sapiens, Neanderthals, and Densiovans interbred several times and on several different continents over a period of 60,000 years.
The report indicated that Melanesians have inherited from 2 percent to 4 percent of their DNA from Denisovans.
Researchers believe that Melanesian ancestors migrated and then acquired Denisovan DNA somewhere in Asia.
Melanesians also contain Neanderthal DNA from a mating period that took place soon after Homo sapiens migrated out of Africa.
Denisovans also had interbred with 440,000-year-old ancestors of Neanderthals.
A second interbreeding with Neanderthals is indicated in the DNA of Europeans, South Asians, and East Asians, and likely occurred somewhere in the Middle East.
The genome also records that East Asians had a third mating with Neanderthals sometime after splitting off from Europeans and South Asians.
Homo sapiens migrated to southern China between 120 kya and 80 kya and Europe about 45–43 kya.
They replaced indigenous hominin species in Eurasia, and then, as sea levels dropped during glacial periods, adventurous individuals went to sea in watercraft, populating Australia about 50 kya and oceanic islands during the most recent 3,000 years.
Most evidence points to Homo sapiens migrating to the Americas about 14–13.3 kya; however, some evidence suggests that this migration may have taken place up to 15,000 years earlier.
Some of the extensive variation in bodily proportions, external features, and blood chemistry of modern peoples may reflect adjustments to different biomes over geologically short time spans.
However, molecular genetic studies show that genomic differences between even far-flung peoples are minuscule compared with variations within each local population.
This demonstrates that, for modern Homo sapiens, race is a mere cultural construct with no biological basis.
SOME PHYSICAL VARIATIONS
During the history of Homo sapiens, local populations have developed various physical as well as cultural and linguistic differences.
Some of these physical variations must have been controlled by the environment, others by purely random factors.
It is clear, for example, that variations in skin color are responses to variations in the intensity of sunlight in different climates.
The dark pigment melanin protects against the highly damaging effects of the sun’s ultraviolet (UV) radiation, and the darkest skins occur in the tropics, where such radiation is highest.
In contrast, skins at higher latitudes tend to be pale, which allows the less-intense UV radiation to penetrate the skin and promote the synthesis of essential factors such as vitamin D. Similarly, populations living in hot, dry areas tend to be taller and more slender than those living in very cold climates, because they need to lose heat rather than retain it as a rounder body does.
On the other hand, it is unknown why some populations have thinner lips than others or why many Asians have an additional fold of skin above their upper eyelids.
These and other variations may be inconsequential to evolutionary fitness and could be the mere results of genetic variations that arose through random mutations.
Scientists have always had difficulty classifying people into groups on the basis of genetic variation, and the reason is simple.
Genetically, only two processes can take place within a species.
One of these processes is the diversification of local populations - a routine and unremarkable event that requires some degree of isolation of local groups.
The other is the reintegration of populations and the consequent blending of characteristics via interbreeding when contact is reestablished.
Human populations show the results of both processes are driven by the climatic shifts of ice ages.
Today, although it is generally possible to tell an Asian from a European from an African, many individuals defy such categorization, and boundaries are impossible to draw.
This is why, from a biologist’s point of view, trying to define “races” is impossible if not pointless.
Race is instead a social construct addressed by cultural anthropology.
In addition to the physical characteristics that distinguish humans from other primates, humans also exhibit unique social behaviors and cognitive abilities.
Most prominent among these unique features are speech, language, and culture.
The origin and development of human culture - articulate spoken language and symbolically mediated ideas, beliefs, and behavior - are among the greatest unsolved puzzles in the study of human evolution.
Such questions cannot be resolved by skeletal or archaeological data.
Research on the behavior and cognitive capabilities of apes, monkeys, and other animals and on cognitive development in human children provide some clues, but extrapolating this information back through time is tenuous at best.
Complicating the scenario further, it may be that today’s chimpanzees, bonobos, and other anthropoid primates have more sophisticated cognitive capabilities and behavioral skills than those of some early hominins, because they and their ancestors have had several million years to overcome many challenges and perhaps have become more advanced in the process.
Speech has been inferred by some investigators on the basis of certain internal skull features, for example, in H. habilis, but jaw shape and additional traits suggest otherwise.
Still other researchers claim that human speech was not even fully developed in early members of anatomically modern Homo sapiens, because of the simplicity of their tool kits and art before the Late Paleolithic.
It is impossible to assess linguistic competency by observing the insides of reassembled fossil craniums that are incomplete, battered, and distorted - and in any case the brains probably did not fit snugly against the walls of the braincase.
The apparent cerebral expansion in H. habilis and H. rudolfensis may imply a general increase in cognitive abilities, manipulative skill, or other factors besides speech.
Particularly unreliable are claims that the specific internal cranial impressions of a Broca cap is evidence of speech. (
The Broca cap is an area in the frontal lobe of the hominid brain.)
Prominent Broca caps exist among some chimpanzees, yet no ape has uttered a word, despite laborious attempts to get them to speak.
A humanoid vocal tract is undetectable in fossils because it comprises only soft tissues and leaves no bony landmarks.
Although versatile human speech is reasonably linked to a relatively spacious pharynx and mobile tongue, the absence of such features is not a compelling reason to deny some form of vocal language in ancestral hominins.
It is argued that articulate human speech is impossible without a lowered voice box (larynx) and an expanded region above it.
If this presumption were true, even Neanderthals would be inept vocally and probably also quite primitive cognitively as compared with Late Paleolithic Homo sapiens populations such as the Cro-Magnons.
Gibbons and great apes do not speak, yet they have throat traits related to speech, albeit to a lesser degree than humans’.
The calls of gibbons are wonderfully varied in pitch and pattern, and, if such sounds were broken into discrete bits with consonants, they could emulate words.
The same may be said for great apes.
Orangutans, chimpanzees, and bonobos have sufficiently mobile lips and tongues; they simply lack neural circuitry for speech.
Conversely, if the theory that different abilities are governed by distinct and separate forms of intelligence (multiple intelligences) is correct, much of tool-using behavior and artistic ability would have to be based upon neurological structures fundamentally different from those that support verbal ability.
Human children begin to use language before they become sophisticated tool users.
Similarly, a form of speech might have preceded forms of tool behavior that are symbolically mediated.
Visual arts such as painting and sculpture are expressions of spatial intelligence, which is centered principally in areas of the brain different from those related to speech.
Therefore, one cannot expect the problem of language origins or language competence to be clarified by studying Paleolithic symbolism and imagery, despite the amazing array of cave art and polished bone, antler, ivory, stone, and shell artifacts associated with the period.
Yet if the stunning proliferation and stylistic variability of tools, bodily ornaments, and artistic works during the Paleolithic do not point unequivocally to the specific use of speech, the presence of these symbolically mediated artifacts - among the earliest of which are shell beads found in Morocco and made about 82,000 years ago - does indicate that early humans were capable of complex conceptual and abstract thought.
This cave painting of bison, dating from 113,130 to 14,820 years ago, was found in Altamira, Spain, and was made by the Magdalenian culture.
The Magdalenians killed animals with spears and traps, and may have had leisure time in which to paint.
Historically, all human groups manifest rich symbolically mediated language, religion, and social, political, and economic systems, even in the absence of elaborate material culture.
The demands on the social intelligence of peoples who live in environments with relatively few artifacts are similar to demands placed upon those who depend upon complex technological gadgets and shelters for comfort.
Consequently, prehistoric Homo sapiens cannot be regarded as cognitively less capable than ourselves, and it is impossible to state which hominin species were “fully human” as symbol users.
As a case in point, meticulously documented language studies of captive bonobos and chimpanzees demonstrate that they have the capability to comprehend and use symbols in order to communicate with humans and with one another, but the use of this potential in the wild has not yet been demonstrated.
Perhaps the human capacity to use symbols to represent feelings, situations, objects, and ideas developed before being commandeered by the several intelligences and before it became a boon to vocal communication.
Archaeological evidence indicates that, like at least some of their Pliocene predecessors, the most recent hominins were probably omnivorous.
However, how much meat was in their diets and whether they obtained it by scavenging, hunting, or both was poorly documented until about 200–100 kya.
Stone tools and cut marks on bones at archaeological sites attest to a long history of meat eating in the tribe Hominini, but this practice could have existed long before stone tools were invented.
Like chimpanzees, bonobos, baboons, capuchins, and other primates, early Pliocene hominins may have killed and fragmented vertebrate prey with only their hands and jaws instead of tools.
The extent to which our ancestors’ hunting, scavenging, or other activities were communal and coordinated via symbolic communication has not been determined.
There is no valid way to estimate group size and composition because there is little evidence of movement patterns, shelters, and graves until the Late Paleolithic.
Archaeological traces of human-made shelters occur rarely from 60 kya, then become more common, particularly in regions with notable seasons of inclement weather.
The first appearances and development of symbolically based spirituality are also highly elusive because they left no morphological or unarguable archaeological trace until the innovation of writing and ritual paraphernalia.
Although some Neanderthals buried their dead, there is little evidence of mortuary ceremony in their graves.
Graves of Homo sapiens from 40 kya sometimes contain grave goods.
Gorillas, chimpanzees, and bonobos are a rich resource for cultural anthropologists, biologists, and psychologists who speculate on the origins of human society.
Gorillas appeal to theorists who stress male dominance and patriarchy.
A characteristic gorilla group has one silverback (an older dominant male), one or more subordinate blackback males, adult females outnumbering males, and youngsters of various ages.
The silverback is the hub of the cohesive group.
Chimpanzee society is also dominated by males, which form a stable core of the group.
Chimpanzees and bonobos live in larger groups numbering more than 100 individuals, though they forage, travel, and nest in much smaller bands that vary daily in number and composition.
Among chimpanzees there is a top male, followed by several others whose ranks depend upon which other males are present.
Bonobos have stronger affiliations between males and females than chimpanzees do, and the organizational hub of bonobo social groups is based on intimate relations among adult females, particularly mothers, which often retain strong bonds with their sons.
Adult male bonobos are less strongly bonded with one another than chimpanzee males are.
Because bonobos are more pacific and tolerant in social relationships and are highly sexual, they are popular with those who would model our heritage as free of “killer apes.”
However, observers of apes, Old World monkeys, and other mammals have documented incidents of aggression as well as concern for others in their subjects.
Both tendencies are deeply rooted among the higher primates.
A bonobo uses a rock to break open nuts.
Bonobos have opposable digits on their hands and feet.
Female bonobos transfer freely between bonobo communities, which tend to be more egalitarian and peaceful than chimpanzee social groups.
The emergence of the human nuclear family has been a particularly knotty problem for Western evolutionary theorists.
Many theorists suggest that, like bonobos and chimpanzees, humans probably are fundamentally promiscuous, though such mating behavior is heavily proscribed by the cultures into which individuals are born and reside.
Indeed, theorists who wish to construct models of the emergence of hominin societies on the basis of extant ape societies seldom tackle the overriding fact that humans utilize a wide variety of kinship, social, sexual, and political arrangements, all of which are maintained and expressed symbolically as well as practically.
Researchers often fail to search for the cognitive basis of symbolic representation, manipulation, and invention in apes, citing instead forms of behavior that appear to harbinger specific human conditions.
It will take the efforts of several scientific disciplines and sophisticated technology, probably over many years, to discover the underlying nature of our mental faculties, their neurological basis, and their development over time.
Apes can play important roles in this enterprise only if they are allowed to survive in their natural habitats and only if they are viewed as being on their own evolutionary paths and not merely as steps toward the human condition.
An Inuit family is seated in an igloo in Nunavut, Canada.
Anthropologists have had to rethink what the words “nuclear family” mean to human society today.
The roles of husband, wife, father, mother, son, daughter, brother, and sister are embodied by people whose biological relationships do not necessarily conform to the Western definitions of these terms.
Tracing the history of the spread of Homo sapiens and its diversification is undeniably fascinating, and several genetic approaches have been used to try to unravel it.
In addition to mitochondrial DNA and its male counterpart, the Y chromosome, DNA from the Human Genome Project has also helped clarify humanity’s relatively short but astonishingly complex history.
The Human Genome Project, which operated from 1990 to 2003, was an international collaboration that successfully determined the sequences of almost all the genetic content of the chromosomes of the human organism.
Comparative DNA sequence analyses of samples representing distinct modern populations of humans have revolutionized the field of anthropology.
For example, by following DNA sequence variations present on mitochondrial DNA, which is maternally inherited, and on the Y chromosome, which is paternally inherited, molecular anthropologists have confirmed Africa as the cradle of the modern human species and have identified the waves of human migration that emerged from Africa over the last 60,000 years to populate the other continents of the world.
Databases that map DNA sequence variations that are common in some populations but rare in others have enabled molecular genealogists to trace the continent or even subcontinent of origin of given families or individuals.
Perhaps more important than helping to trace the roots of humans and to see the differences between populations of humans, DNA sequence information has enabled recognition of how closely related one population of humans is to another and how closely related humans are to the multitude of other species that inhabit Earth.
A researcher extracts material from a bone fragment for the Neanderthal nuclear genome project.
German researchers coded the entire gene sequence that enabled them to infer the individual’s maternal genetic lineage.
After comparing these results with those from the H. sapiens gene sequence, they established that modern humans did not evolve from Neanderthals.
Learning about the emergence of the human species is a crucial area of study today.
Understanding how early humans persevered and how they made use of the resources they found around them provides some revelations about human intuition, skills, and activities.
But above all, an understanding of human origins provides a glimpse into early human history, into a time and world virtually unimaginable to people alive today and that yet shaped the fundamental nature of their existence.
And remarkably, the same influence of change - the ongoing responses of human populations to shifting environmental factors - that accompanied and defined human life so many millions of years ago remains with modern-day humans.