From the window of my room, I could see a tall cotton-rose hibiscus.
In spring, when green foliage was half hidden by mist, the tree looked very enchanting dotted with red blossom.
This inspiring neighbor of mine often set my mind working.
I gradually regarded it as my best friend.
Nevertheless, when I opened the window one morning, to my amazement, the tree was almost bare beyond recognition as a result of the storm ravages the night before.
Struck by the plight, I was seized with a sadness at the thought "all the blossom is doomed to fall".
I could not help sighing with emotion: the course of life never runs smooth, for there are so many ups and downs, twists and turns.
The vicissitudes of my life saw my beloved friends parting one after another.
Isn't it similar to the tree shedding its flowers in the wind?
This event faded from my memory as time went by.
One day after I came home from the countryside, I found the room stuffy and casually opened the window.
Something outside caught my eyes and dazzled me.
It was a plum tree all scarlet with blossom set off beautifully by the sunset.
The surprise discovery overwhelmed me with pleasure.
I wondered why I had no idea of some unyielding life sprouting over the fallen petals when I was grieving for the hibiscus.
When the last withered petal dropped, all the joyful admiration for the hibiscus sank into oblivion as if nothing was left, until the landscape was again ablaze with the red plum blossom to remind people of life's alternation and continuance.
Can't it be said that life is actually a symphony, a harmonious composition of loss and gain?
Standing by the windows lost in thought for a long time, I realized that no scenery in the world remains unchanged.
As long as you keep your heart basking in the sun, every dawn will present a fine prospect for you to unfold and the world will always be about new hopes.
My 14-year-old son, Mike, and I spotted the coat simultaneously.
It was hanging on a rack at a second-hand clothing store in Northampton Mass., crammed in with shoddy trench coats and an assortment of sad, woolen overcoats, a rose among thorns.
While the other coats drooped, this one looked as if it were holding itself up.
The thick, black wool of the double-breasted chesterfield was soft and unworn, as though it had been preserved in mothballs for years in dead old Uncle Carl's steamer trunk.
The coat had a black velvet collar, beautiful tailoring, a Fifth Avenue label and an unbelievable price of $28.
We looked at each other, saying nothing, but Mike's eyes gleamed.
Dark, woolen topcoats were popular just then with teenage boys, but could cost several hundred dollars new.
This coat was even better, bearing that touch of classic elegance from a bygone era.
Mike slid his arms down into the heavy satin lining of the sleeves and buttoned the coat.
He turned from side to side, eyeing himself in the mirror with a serious, studied expression that soon changed into a smile.
The fit was perfect.
Mike wore the coat to school the next day and came home wearing a big grin. "
Ho, did the kids like your coat? "
I asked. "
They loved it," he said, carefully folding it over the back of a chair and smoothing it flat.
I started calling him "Lord Chesterfield" and "The Great Gatsby. "
Over the next few weeks, a change came over Mike.
Agreement replaced contrariness, quiet, reasoned discussion replaced argument.
He became more judicious, more mannerly, more thoughtful, eager to please. "
Good dinner, Mom," he would say every evening.
He would generously loan his younger brother his tapes and lecture him on the niceties of behaviour; without a word of objection, he would carry in wood for the stove.
One day when I suggested that he might start on homework before dinner, Mike, a veteran procrastinator, said, "You're right.
I guess I will. "
When I mentioned this incident to one of his teachers and remarked that I didn't know what caused the changes, she said laughing, "It must be his coat!"
Another teacher told him she was giving him a good mark not only because he had earned it but because she liked his coat.
At the library, we ran into a friend who had not seen our children for a long time, "Could this be Mike? "
he asked, looking up to Mike's new height, assessing the cut of his coat and extending his hand, one gentleman to another.
Mike and I both know we should never mistake a person's clothes for the real person within them.
But there is something to be said for wearing a standard of excellence for the world to see, for practicing standards of excellence in thought, speech, and behaviour, and for matching what is on the inside to what is on the outside.
Sometimes, watching Mike leave for school, I've remembered with a keen sting what it felt like to be in the eighth grade a time when it was as easy to try on different approaches to life as it was to try on a coat.
The whole world, the whole future is stretched out ahead, a vast panorama where all the doors are open.
And if I were there right now, I would picture myself walking through those doors wearing my wonderful, magical coat.
When you came into the world, she held you in her arms.
You thanked her by weeping your eyes out.
When you were 1 year old, she fed you and bathed you.
You thanked her by crying all night long.
When you were 2 years old, she taught you to walk.
You thanked her by running away when she called.
When you were 3 years old, she made all your meals with love.
You thanked her by tossing your plate on the floor.
When you were 4 years old, she gave you some crayons.
You thanked her by coloring the dining room table.
When you were 5 years old, she dressed you for the holidays.
You thanked her by plopping into the nearest pile of mud.
When you were 6 years old, she walked you to school.
You thanked her by screaming, "I'm not going! "
When you were 7 years old, she bought you a baseball.
You thanked her by throwing it through the next-door-neighbor's window.
When you were 8 years old, she handed you an ice cream.
You thanked her by dripping it all over your lap.
When you were 9 years old, she paid for piano lessons.
You thanked her by never even bothering to practice.
When you were 10 years old, she drove you all day, from soccer to gymnastics, to one birthday party after another.
You thanked her by jumping out of the car and never looking back.
When you were 11 years old, she took you and your friends to the movies.
You thanked her by asking to sit in a different row.
When you were 12 years old, she warned you not to watch certain TV shows.
You thanked her by waiting until she left the house.
When you were 13, she suggested a haircut.
You thanked her by telling her she had no taste.
When you were 14, she paid for a month away at summer camp.
You thanked her by forgetting to write a single letter.
When you were 15, she came home from work, looking for a hug.
You thanked her by having your bedroom door locked.
When you were 16, she taught you how to drive her car.
You thanked her by taking it every chance you could.
When you were 17, she was expecting an important call.
You thanked her by being on the phone all night.
When you were 18, she cried at your high school graduation.
You thanked her by staying out partying until dawn.
When you were 19, she paid for your college tuition, drove you to campus, and carried your bags.
You thanked her by saying good-bye outside the dorm so you wouldn't be embarrassed in front of your friends.
When you were 20, she asked whether you were seeing anyone.
You thanked her by saying, "It's none of your business. "
When you were 21, she suggested certain careers for your future.
You thanked her by saying, "I don't want to be like you. "
When you were 22, she hugged you at your college graduation.
You thanked her by asking whether she could pay for a trip to Europe.
When your were 23, she sent some furniture to your first apartment.
You thanked her by telling your friends it was ugly.
When you were 24, she met your fiancé and asked about your plans for the future.
You thanked her by glaring and growling, "Muuhh-ther, please! "
When you were 25, she helped to pay for your wedding and she cried and told you how deeply she loved you.
You thanked her by moving halfway across the country.
When you were 30, she called with some advice on the baby.
You thanked her by telling her, "Things are different now. "
When you were 40, she called to remind you of a relative's birthday.
You thanked her by saying you were "really busy right now. "
When you were 50, she fell ill and needed you to take care of her.
You thanked her by talking about the burden parents become to their children.
And then, one day, she quietly died.
And everything you never did came crashing down like thunder on your heart.
To love your mother, because you only have one mother in your lifetime!
I like the subtle fresh green budding from the branches of the tree - the herald of spring, ushering in the dawn…
I like the subtle flow of cloud that makes sky seem even more vast, azure and immense…
I like the subtle wind.
In spring, it steals a kiss on my cheek; in autumn, it caresses my face; in summer, it brings in cool sweet smell; in winter, it carries a crisp chilliness…
I like the subtle taste of tea that lasts long after a sip.
The subtle bitter is what it is meant to be…
I like the subtle friendship that does not hold people together.
Instead, an occasional greeting spreads our longings far beyond…
I like the subtle longing for a friend, when I sink deeply in a couch, mind wandering in memories of the past…
Love should also be subtle, without enslaving the ones fallen into her arms.
Not a bit less or a bit more…
Subtle friendship is true, subtle greetings are pure, subtle love is tender, subtle longing is deep, subtle wishes come from the bottom of your heart…
It's good to make mistakes, and here is why.
First of all, mistakes are a clear sign that you are trying new things.
It's always good to try new things because when you are trying new things you are growing.
If you never try anything new, how can you improve?
How can you expand?
How can you innovate?
The simple answer is, "You can't. "
Look around you.
With very few exceptions, either everything you see in your physical world or every single detail of every single thing is the result of someone trying something new.
Another good thing about mistakes is this: when you are making mistakes, you are learning.
Consider this : Edison failed 10,000 times before he perfected the light bulb.
When asked how it felt to fail that many times, he remarked that he hadn't failed 10,000 times, but rather had learned 10,000 things that didn't work.
Finally when you make a mistake you are that much closer to success.
Why?
Because when all is said and done, you will have tried some finite number of things before you succeeded.
Every time you made a mistake you eliminated one of those things and are one step closer.
But this all doesn't mean that you should forge ahead with disregard for the consequences of a mistake.
Quite the contrary, when you try something new you have to be willing to set some reasonable limits so that, in the event that it doesn't work out the way you want it to, you will be in a position to try again.
We all have limited resources in the form of time and money so don't blow them all on one approach to a problem.
Realize that it probably won't be perfect the first time and allocate these resources appropriately so you can learn, modify, and try it again.
Only by embracing and using your mistakes in this way can you make significant advances in your career.
There is an old axiom that goes, "If you're not making mistakes, you're not trying hard enough. "
So go forth and make mistakes.
And learn.
And grow.
And prosper.
When she looked ahead, Florence Chadwick saw nothing but a solid wall of fog.
Her body was numb.
She had been swimming for nearly sixteen hours.
Already she was the first woman to swim the English Channel in both directions.
Now, at age 34, her goal was to become the first woman to swim from Catalina Island to California coast.
On that Fourth of July morning in 1952, the sea was like an ice bath and the fog was so dense she could hardly see her support boats.
Sharks cruised toward her lone figure, only to be driven away by rifle shots.
Against the frigid grip of the sea, she struggled on - hour after hour - while millions watched on national television.
Alongside Florence in one of the boats, her mother and her trainer offered encouragement.
They told her it wasn't much farther.
But all she could see was fog.
They urged her not to quit.
She never had… until then.
With only a half mile to go, she asked to be pulled out.
Still thawing her chilled body several hours later, she told a reporter, "Look, I'm not excusing myself, but if I could have seen land I might have made it. "
It was not fatigue or even the cold water that defeated her.
It was the fog.
She was unable to see her goal because of it.
Two months later, she tried again.
This time, despite the same dense fog, she swam with her faith intact and her goal clearly pictured in her mind.
She knew that somewhere behind that fog was land and this time she made it!
Florence Chadwick became the first woman to swim the Catalina Channel, eclipsing the men's record by two hours!
The love story between President Reagan and his wife Nancy is as legendary as the man himself.
From the time they met in 1950, through the 1990s Ronald Reagan wrote letters to his wife, Nancy.
No matter what else was going on in his life or where he was - raveling to make movies, in the California governor's office, at the White House, or on Air Force One, and sometimes even from across the room - Reagan wrote letters to Nancy, to express his love, thoughts, and feelings in order to stay in touch.
From an Atlanta hotel room, he wrote: "My darling, here it is, our day.
If we were home, we would have a fire and funnies.
And we would hate anybody who called or dropped in.
As it is, I'm sitting here on the top of the sixth floor, beside a phony fireplace, looking out at a gray, wet sky, and listening to a radio playing music not intended for one person alone.
" It doesn't matter how long I stayed away, with all the missing you there is still a wonderful warmth in this loneliness.
Like looking forward to a bright, warm room, no matter how dark and cold it is at the moment, you know the room is there and waiting.
I love you so much.
I don't want - I don't even mind that life made me wait so long to find you.
" The waiting only made the finding sweeter.
I love you.
Ronnie. "
From the governor's office of the state of California, "Dear Mrs. Reagan, your loving faithful devotion has been observed these 19 - some say 20 years.
There are no words to describe the happiness you've brought to the gov.
It's no secret that he is the happiest married man in the world and would be totally lost and desolate without you.
It seemed to me you should know this and be aware of how essential you are in this man's life.
By his own admission, he is completely in love with you and happier than even a gov deserves.
With love and appreciation, your in love gov. "
This letter was written on Christmas Day, 1980.
Mrs. Reagan called it perhaps the most important turning point in all their lives, the Reagans would soon be leaving California for Washington and the White House.
" My beloved first lady: I'm supposed to be sitting here with my fingers crossed watching you open a package.
I, of course, would be hoping it was something you really wanted, something that would show how much I love you.
You see, I have this problem.
I miss you when you first leave the room; I worry about you when you go out of the front door.
Now, this isn't good for me, not since my transplant you into my heart 29 years ago next March.
Without you, there would be no sun, no moon, no stars.
With you, they are all out at the same time.
Merry Christmas, my love!
Your husband. "
This letter was written on White House stationery for celebration of their 29th wedding anniversary.
Nancy reflected, by the way, that no matter how busy he was with duties as President, he always remembered their anniversary.
That was March 4, 1981.
" Dear First Lady, as President of the United States, it is my honor and privilege to cite you for service above and beyond the call of duty: in that you have made one man, me, the happiest man in the world for 29 years. "
" Beginning in 1951, Nancy Davis, seeing the plight of a lonely man who didn't know how lonely he really was, determined to rescue him from a completely empty life.
With patience and tenderness, she gradually brought the light of understanding to his dark and obtuse mind, and he discovered the joy of loving someone with all his heart. "
" Nancy Davis then went on to bring him happiness for the next 29 years as Nancy Davis Reagan, for which she has received and will continue to receive his undying devotion forever.
She's done this in spite of the fact that he still can't find the words to tell her how lost he would be without her.
He sits in the oval office, from which he can see her window, and feels warm all over just to know she's there. "
These extraordinary letters weave a moving portrait of a long and loving marriage and reveal the intense love of the couple.
President Reagan suffered from Alzheimer for 10 years and gradually lost most of his memory.
However, he recognized Nancy when he was able to stumble into a moment of clarity, while with her love his wife accompanied him to the end of his life.
Dear Malia and Sasha,
I know that you've both had a lot of fun these last two years on the campaign trail, going to picnics and parades and state fairs, eating all sorts of junk food your mother and I probably shouldn't have let you have.
But I also know that it hasn't always been easy for you and Mom, and that as excited as you both are about that new puppy, it doesn't make up for all the time we've been apart.
I know how much I've missed these past two years, and today I want to tell you a little more about why I decided to take our family on this journey.
When I was a young man, I thought life was all about me - about how I'd make my way in the world, become successful, and get the things I want.
But then the two of you came into my world with all your curiosity and mischief and those smiles that never fail to fill my heart and light up my day.
And suddenly, all my big plans for myself didn't seem so important anymore.
I soon found that the greatest joy in my life was the joy I saw in yours.
And I realized that my own life wouldn't count for much unless I was able to ensure that you had every opportunity for happiness and fulfillment in yours.
In the end, girls, that's why I ran for President: because of what I want for you and for every child in this nation.
I want all our children to go to schools worthy of their potential - schools that challenge them, inspire them, and instill in them a sense of wonder about the world around them.
I want them to have the chance to go to college - even if their parents aren't rich.
And I want them to get good jobs: jobs that pay well and give them benefits like health care, jobs that let them spend time with their own kids and retire with dignity.
I want us to push the boundaries of discovery so that you'll live to see new technologies and inventions that improve our lives and make our planet cleaner and safer.
And I want us to push our own human boundaries to reach beyond the divides of race and region, gender and religion that keep us from seeing the best in each other.
Sometimes we have to send our young men and women into war and other dangerous situations to protect our country - but when we do, I want to make sure that it is only for a very good reason, that we try our best to settle our differences with others peacefully, and that we do everything possible to keep our servicemen and women safe.
And I want every child to understand that the blessings these brave Americans fight for are not free - that with the great privilege of being a citizen of this nation comes great responsibility.
That was the lesson your grandmother tried to teach me when I was your age, reading me the opening lines of the Declaration of Independence and telling me about the men and women who marched for equality because they believed those words put to paper two centuries ago should mean something.
She helped me understand that America is great not because it is perfect but because it can always be made better, and that the unfinished work of perfecting our union falls to each of us.
It's a charge we pass on to our children, coming closer with each new generation to what we know American should be.
I hope both of you will take up that work, righting the wrongs that you see and working to give others the chances you've had.
Not just because you have an obligation to give something back to this country that has given our family so much - although you do have that obligation.
But because you have an obligation to yourself.
Because it is only when you hitch your wagon to something larger than yourself that you will realize your true potential.
These are the things I want for you - to grow up in a world with no limits on your dreams and no achievements beyond your reach, and to grow into compassionate, committed women who will help build that world.
And I want every child to have the same chances to learn and dream and grow and thrive that you girls have.
That's why I've taken our family on this great adventure.
I am so proud of both of you.
I love you more than you can ever know.
And I am grateful every day for your patience, poise, grace, and humor as we prepare to start our new life together in the White House.
Love, Dad
How come I stand alone by the river?
The hazy sky is that dawn or dusk?
Where can I inquire?
I simply feel I am in an ocean of flowers, amid the flowers mixed a few white roses.
There she comes, she comes down from the hill.
With a bunch of flowers in hands, she appears in plain white dress with beautiful make-up.
"Come hither, give you a white rose, you may pin on the lapel," I say.
She beams with a word, but I can not hear.
However, I seem not to pick one, and she does not wear it, holding the flowers still, she walks forward.
Looking up the path she passed, I can see both sides of the path covered with blooming flowers, drooping flowers, and fallen flowers.
I suppose white flower is better than red flower all the time; yet why didn't I pick one, and she didn't wear one?
What's the place forward?
Why not go with her?
It's over, the flowers disappear, and the dream awakes, what may be ahead?
If I had picked one, had she been wearing it?
Warble me now for joy of lilac-time,
(returning in reminiscence,)
Sort me O tongue and lips for Nature's sake, souvenirs of earliest summer,
Gather the welcome signs,
(as children with pebbles or stringing shells,)
Put in April and May, the hylas croaking in the ponds, the elastic air,
Bees, butterflies, the sparrow with its simple notes,
Blue bird and darting swallow, nor forget the high-hole flashing his golden wings,
The tranquil sunny haze, the clinging smoke, the vapor,
Shimmer of waters with fish in them, the cerulean above,
All that is jocund and sparkling, the brooks running,
The maple woods, the crisp February days and the sugar-making,
The robin where he hops, bright-eyed, brown-breasted,
With musical clear call at sunrise, and again at sunset,
Or flitting among the trees of the apple-orchard, building the nest of his mate,
The melted snow of March, the willow sending forth its yellow-green sprouts,
For spring-time is here!
the summer is here!
and what is this in it and from it?
Thou, soul, unloosen'd - the restlessness after I know not what;
Come, let us lag here no longer, and let us be up and away!
O if one could but fly like a bird!
O to escape, to sail forth as in a ship!
To glide with thee O soul, o'er all, in all as a ship o'er the waters;
Gathering these hints, the preludes, the blue sky, the grass, the morning drops of dew,
The lilac-scent, the bushes with dark green heart-shaped leaves,
Wood-violets, the little delicate pale blossoms called innocence,
Samples and sorts not for themselves alone, but for their atmosphere,
To grace the bush I love - to sing with the birds,
A warble for joy of lilac-time, returning in reminiscence.
I spent the tenth summer of my childhood, the most memorable months of my life, in western Norway at the mountain farm where my mother was born.
What remains most vivid in my mind are the times I shared with my Grandfather Bob.
As an American, I always thought people simply bought whatever they needed.
Whether Grandfather knew this, I don't know.
But it seems he wanted to teach me something, because one day he said, "Come with me.
I have something for you. "
I followed him into the basement, where he led me to a workbench by a window. "
You should have a toy boat.
You can sail it at Storvassdal," he said, referring to a small lake a few miles from the house.
Swell, I thought, looking around for the boat.
But there was none.
Grandfather picked up a block of wood, about 18 inches long. "
The boat is here," he said. "
You can bring it out. "
Then he handed me a razor-sharp ax.
I wasn't sure what to do, so Grandfather showed me how to handle the tool.
I started to chop away to shape the bow.
Later, after he taught me the proper use of hammer and chisel, I began to hollow out the hull.
" It'll be a fine boat, and you'll make it all with your own hands," he said. "
No one can give you what you make for yourself. "
The words rang in my head as I worked.
Finally I finished the hull and made a mast.
Then my boat started sailing.
It wasn't much to look at, but I was proud of what I had built.
I launched my boat and daydreamed while a slight breeze carried the little craft to the opposite shore.
The air was crisp and clean.
There was no sound but the occasional warble of a bird.
A crisis developed when we were ready to return to America. "
You cannot bring that boat with you," my mother said.
We already had too much baggage.
Feeling blue, I went to Storvassdal for the last time before we left, found that large boulder, placed my boat in a hollow space under its base, piled stones to hide it and resolved to return one day to recover my treasure.
In the summer of 1964, I went back to Norway with my parents, my wife and children.
I shall never forget that moment.
As I cradled the boat, I could feel my grandfather's presence.
He had died 22 years before, and yet he was there.
We three were together again: Grandfather, me and the little boat.
My last trip to Storvassdal was in 1991.
This time I brought two of my granddaughters from America: Kitty, 13, and Maggie, 12.
As we climbed the mountain, I thought of my grandfather and compared his life with that of my granddaughters.
Working tirelessly on that isolated farm, my grandfather taught me that we should be contented and grateful for what we have whether it be much or little.
We should bear the burdens as well as relish the joys.
There is so much we cannot control, but we should try to make things better when it's possible.
We should depend upon ourselves to make the best of it in our own way.
That day, I took them to Storvassdal, hoping they would somehow understand the importance of the little boat and its simple message of self-reliance.
High in the mountain, I hesitated to speak lest I would disturb our tranquility.
Then Maggie looked up and broke my reverie as she said softly, "Grandpa, someday I'll come back. "
She paused, "and I'll bring my children. "
Traveller, must you go?
The night is still and the darkness swoons upon the forest.
The lamps are bright in our balcony, the flowers all fresh, and the youthful eyes still awake.
Is the time for your parting come?
Traveller, must you go?
We have not bound your feet with our entreating arms.
Your doors are open.
Your horse stands saddled at the gate.
If we have tried to bar your passage it was but with our songs.
Did we ever try to hold you back it was but with our eyes.
Traveller, we are helpless to keep you.
We have only our tears.
What quenchless fire glows in your eyes?
What restless fever runs in your blood?
What call from the dark urges you?
What awful incantation have you read among the stars in the sky, that with a sealed secret message the night entered your heart, silent and strange?
If you do not care for merry meetings, if you must have peace, weary heart, we shall put our lamps out and silence our harps.
We shall sit still in the dark in the rustle of leaves, and the tired moon will shed pale rays on your window.
O traveller, what sleepless spirit has touched you from the heart of the mid-night?
Happiness is our highest well-being.
It is peace and gentleness and lightheartedness.
It is being thankful for all the little special things which happen around us and to us every day.
To be happy is to be able to get a perspective when things look dark and you start to lose hope.
Happiness is looking for the gifts, which are always there, even when they seem hidden.
Happy people roll with the punches.
They know from experience that everything changes.
Today's good fortune may vanish tomorrow - today's crises may turn out to be tomorrow's good fortune.
To pursue joy is to lose it.
The only way to get it is to follow steadily the path of duty, without thinking of joy, and then, like sheep, it comes most surely, unsought.
What sunshine is to flowers, smiles are to humanity.
They are trifles, to be sure, but scattered along life's pathway, the good they do is inconceivable.
As we all know, love is the crux of a happy life.
Love helps us stay calm and serene even when things are tough.
It can carry us through the hard times.
Love looks for ways to be of service.
Love is enjoying the surprises of life and being totally delighted with what life gives you.
Love is the key to happiness and it is a real blessing to others.
People who love make the world a kind and gentle place and other people feel safe around them.
They appreciate differences instead of making them a cause for prejudice or fighting.
What is happiness?
It is not wishing for what we do not have, but enjoying what we do possess.
The more we can enjoy what we have, the happier we are.
Every night several hundred planes bearing a purple, white, and orange design touch down at Memphis Airport, in Tennessee.
Crews unload the planes' cargo of, on average, more than half a million parcels and letters, picked up from locations all over the United States earlier in the day.
The packages and envelopes are rapidly sorted according to address, then loaded onto other aircraft and flown to their destinations, to be hand delivered - many within 24 hours of leaving their senders.
This sequence of events is the culmination of a dream of Frederick Smith, the founder, president, chief executive officer, and chairman of the board of the FedEx Corp. - known originally as Federal Express - the largest and most successful overnight delivery service in the world.
Conceived when he was in college and now in its 28th year of operation, Smith's brainchild has become the standard for door-to-door package delivery.
Known for his geniality as well as his business acumen, Smith is reportedly held in high regard by his competitors as well as his employees. "
I always said I thought one of the most brilliant parts of Fred Smith was his ability to deal with each person individually," Tuck Morse, a former Federal Express lawyer, recalled.
Indeed, 3.2 percent of the entire Memphis workforce is made up of FedEx employees, who are said to have been drawn by the company's high wages and family ethos. "
The first thing people do when they move to Memphis is apply for a job at Federal Express," one FedEx worker said. "
Then they go get another job until one opens up here. "
Leadership
Fred Smith was just 27 when he founded FedEx.
Thirty-five years later, he's still at the helm.
He attributes the success of the company to leadership, pure and simple - something he picked up from his years in the military, and from his family.
Frederick Smith was born into a wealthy family on August 11, 1944 in Mississippi.
After his father's death, when he was four years old, his mother, Sally Smith, often talked to the boy about her late husband. "
I kept his father alive in his mind all those years," she recalled. "
I told him how much big Fred loved him, and how much he wanted him to have the best education possible.
And how much he was certain his son would surpass his achievements in business. "
As a child, Smith suffered from Legg-Calve-Perthes disease, which is characterized by the interruption in the blood supply to the thighbones and the consequent improper development of one or both legs.
Unable to walk normally, Smith was picked on by bullies, and he learned to defend himself by swinging at them with his crutch.
Reportedly cured of the disease by the age of 10, he became a star athlete, playing football, basketball, and baseball.
Smith's grandfather had captained a Mississippi River steamboat; his father built the Greyhound Bus Line in the South, expanding his fortune along with the routes.
Smith says he was just four when his father died, "so he probably served as a near mythical role model for me. "
Growing up in Memphis, Tennessee, Smith says, "I didn't know I wanted to go into business, but I knew I wanted a leadership position.
That appealed to me. "
At 15, he was operating a crop-duster over the flat fields of the Mississippi Delta.
As a student at Yale University, he helped resurrect the Yale flying club; its alumni had populated naval aviation history, including the famous "millionaires' unit" in World War I. Smith took care of the club's business and ran a small air-charter operation in New Haven.
With little time to study, his scholastic performance suffered, but Smith never stopped looking for the "big idea".
He thought he had found it when he wrote a term paper for an economics class.
He outlined an idea for a transportation company that would guarantee overnight delivery of small, time-sensitive goods - replacement parts and medical supplies - to major U. S. cities.
The professor was not impressed.
Smith was certain he was onto something, but it would be a while before he could turn his idea into reality.
A Central Hub
With an investment from his father's company, as well as a chunk of his own inheritance, Smith bought his first Dassault Falcon planes, and in 1971 formed the Federal Express Corporation.
The early days of Federal Express were marked by extreme frugality and enormous financial losses.
It was not uncommon for FedEx drivers to pay for gasoline for their vans out of their own pockets.
But despite such problems, Smith always showed concern for the welfare for his employees (as he has continued to do ever since). "
Even when we didn't have the money, even when there weren't couches in this office and electric typewriters, we had a good medical plan for our people," he recalled.
Today, FedEx is a $32 billion global transportation and logistics company, serving over 220 countries and territories.
Operations include more than 670 aircraft and 70, 000 vehicles.
Some 260, 000 employees and independent contractors worldwide handle more than 6 million shipments each business day.
Along the way, FedEx pioneered the "hub and spoke" system, which has since been adopted by almost all major airlines.
The phrase "FedEx it" has become as much a part of the language as Xerox or Google.
Smith says success in business boils down to three things. "
You have got to have a viable product or service and a compelling strategy.
Then you need an efficient management system.
Assuming you have those things, leading a team is the single most important issue in running an organization today. "
For Fred Smith, there is a bred-in-the-bone satisfaction that comes from getting people to do the best job they can do every day.
Although Smith avoids the media and the trappings of public life, he is said to be a friendly and accessible employer.
He reportedly visits FedEx's Memphis site at night from time to time and addresses sorters by name, and for years he extended an offer to any courier with 10 years of service to come to Memphis for an "anniversary breakfast".
That embodies Fred Smith's philosophy: People, Service, Profit (P-S-P).
Smith says, "The P-S-P philosophy is like an unbroken circle or chain.
There are no clearly definable points of entry or exit.
The People link is supported by Profit, which is supported by Service, which is supported by People.
Each link upholds the others and is, in turn, supported by them. "
In articulating this philosophy and in personally involving himself in its implementation in every company policy and action, Frederick Smith truly demonstrates the new brand of leadership that success in the future will demand.
It is curious that our own offenses should seem so much less heinous than the offenses of others.
I suppose the reason is that we know all the circumstances that have occasioned them and so manage to excuse in ourselves what we cannot excuse in others.
We turn our attention away from our own defects, and when we are forced by untoward events to consider them, find it easy to condone them.
For all I know we are right to do this; they are part of us and we must accept the good and bad in ourselves together.
But when we come to judge others, it is not by ourselves as we really are that we judge them, but by an image that we have formed of ourselves from which we have left out everything that offends our vanity or would discredit us in the eyes of the world.
To take a trivial instance: how scornful we are when we catch someone out telling a lie; but who can say that he has never told not one, but a hundred?
There is not much to choose between men.
They are all a hotchpotch of greatness and littleness, of virtue and vice, of nobility and baseness.
Some have more strength of character, or more opportunity, and so in one direction or another give their instincts freer play, but potentially they are the same.
For my part, I do not think I am any better or any worse than most people, but I know that if I set down every action in my life and every thought that has crossed my mind, the world would consider me a monster of depravity.
The knowledge that these reveries are common to all men should inspire one with tolerance to oneself as well as to others.
It is well also if they enable us to look upon our fellows, even the most eminent and respectable, with humor, and if they lead us to take ourselves not too seriously.
Living your successful life requires you to step out.
I remember as a teenager, right out of high school, learning this valuable lesson.
Now 15 years later - my life is the result of habitually stepping out.
The scene is Naval Recruit Training Center in San Diego, California, there I am, standing poker-straight in a line with some 15 other recruits as the Southern California sun tans our young faces.
" I need a volunteer," shouted the drill instructor. "
Take one step forward!"
The first thing you're taught in boot camp is never volunteer for anything.
Of course, I wasn't very good at conforming and stepped right out.
The instructor approached.
Standing nose to nose with me, he stated in a quiet "Dirty Harry" kind of voice, "Pollock, do you know only true leaders step out front? "
John F. Kennedy, echoing Theodore Roosevelt, stated the idea more eloquently when he said, "The credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena, whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who knows the great enthusiasm, the great devotion, and spends himself in a worthy cause; who at best, if he wins, knows the thrills of high achievement, and if he fails, at least fails daring greatly, so that his place shall never be with those cold and timid souls who know neither victory nor defeat. "
Living your life on your terms means stepping out on a regular basis.
You have a song in your heart.
Will you step out from the crowd and sing that song?
Will you risk appearing the fool to live your dreams?
It may seem frightening and lonely to step out front.
It is, but only for a short time.
You'll soon find others who've stepped out front with you.
Step out front this week.
It doesn't have to be a big step.
Maybe you've been thinking about starting your own home-based business.
Maybe there's a class you've been wanting to take.
Whatever it is, take your fist step this week.
Step out and have a great week!
It's your life!
Create it the way you want it.
That bright springtime, when they loved each other, she had scattered without him knowing it the branch full of bitter white of a cherry tree in bloom and a delicate petal gad slipped, like randomly, in the envelope with the love letter.
The petal had faded away before reaching the end of the long way, leaving behind it only a little spring perfume that made him smile like one does to a mild memory.
And he didn't know that she had been.
Next summer, when, for missing him too much, she had got closer without him knowing it.
She was hiding only to send to him the call of love in that shell she had so long warmed up in her hands before making it roll over, down to his feet.
The hesitating steps leaving melancholic traces on the sand had stopped near the pearly shell, brighter and so much different from all the others, and smiling, he had picked it up and thrown it in the sea watching long after it, as after a tender thought.
And he didn't know that she had been.
The sad autumn that followed, after he had driven her away.
She was watching him from behind a tree without him knowing it, and kissing the falling leaf that had stopped in her hair.
She had laid it on the water mirror slightly touched by the mild September wind blowing.
It towards him with all warmth of her heart.
He had smiled to the tired leaf stopping at his feet without understanding why he had felt that he would have picked it up and embraces it against his chest.
And he didn't know that she had been.
That late winter when she won't be any longer - without him knowing it - a snowflake made of silk and silver will fall down from the sky right on his eyelashes and he will smile to the water drop full of rainbows without knowing why, even smiling, he will feel like crying.
And he will never know that she had been.
I was only seventeen when grandma Elsie died.
She was my last living grandparent and I was her only grandchild.
Until the lawyer read her will, I never fully appreciated the depth of the old lady's love.
It was a moment I will never forget - a day that made me the richest kid in town.
Mom, Dad, Aunt Sophie, Uncle Bill and I sat around a small conference table in her attorney's office.
She wanted her daughters and their husbands to share what little monetary wealth she left - the proceeds of her small insurance policy, and antique cameo, a few bracelets, some costume jewelry and her wedding band.
She also bequeathed them the deed to her house, her bank account, a few shares of stock in the local Gas and Electric Company, as well as the American flag she was presented with at Grandpa Edwin's military funeral.
As we rose to leave, the attorney said, "there are three more things."
He reached into his briefcase and brought out a small jewelry box, a letter, and a stack of envelopes neatly wrapped in tissue paper and tied with a fading pink ribbon. "
Jeffrey, your grandmother left you her diamond engagement ring, hoping you'll make good use of it soon," everyone smiled.
" These are also for you, Jeffrey," he said. "
It may be the most precious legacy of all - a letter and this stack of love notes. "
Grandma's letter began, "Dear Jeffrey, I am leaving you one of my most precious treasures - my memories.
These memories are the letters your grandfather Edwin wrote when he was away from me.
Please read them.
They are both priceless and valuable - a guidebook that will teach you how to love a woman, how to understand people, and how to respect and maintain your integrity.
" When you read them you will share the longing and passion a good man feels for a good woman, and you will also discover the empowering enchantment they will give you.
You will also understand the fears and tears of war.
And you will realize the differences between right and wrong.
You will learn to trust the people you love and keep your distance from those you mistrust.
You will learn about mature friendships and how true love can become the core of your life.
" I have been fortunate, Jeffrey.
I loved a wonderful man.
And he loved me.
While his love is now a memory, it is also a real dream that never ends.
Love is like a beautiful photograph you store in an album.
You can enjoy its beauty each time you stare at its wonderment.
It stops time.
And, it makes you young again - forever!
Grandpa Edwin was a soldier, a professional Army officer who served under General Pershing in the trenches in France during World War I. To understand your grandfather's soul, read his loving letters to me.
You'll learn how romantic and beautiful a real man can be.
To truly understand Grandpa's character, read the personal note Jack Pershing wrote me when he heard that Edwin was killed in action.
" Jeffrey, I said this packet of notes was priceless and valuable.
I've just shown you how priceless his love notes are.
Please learn from them.
Then find the right girl to love and love her ardently.
This love will enrich both your lives and make you both happier.
" As for being valuable, save the envelopes.
An appraiser at Sotheby's said the old stamps are worth far more than the rest of my estate.
And, the personal handwritten note from General Pershing is even more valuable than the stamps.
Have a loving, bountiful life.
God bless you.
" I love you, Grandma Elsie. "
For nearly three decades I've practiced medicine, treating and studying cancer, blood diseases and HIV.
During much of that time, I did not consider the impact of hope on my patients' illnesses.
In fact, the fairy-tale claims about hope caused me to flee from the subject.
Then something happened that changed my attitude forever.
On a summer evening in 1987, I went to the hospital to visit an ill colleague.
George Griffin - Harvard professor, revered and beloved chairman of our department of pathology - had been diagnosed with stomach cancer, the worst type that one can have.
In cases like his, only two to three percent of patients live six months.
At nine months, survival is less than one percent.
The bitter irony was that stomach cancer was the disease that George had made his life's work.
No one knew more about the cancer and its dire prognosis than he.
Nonetheless, George had insisted on receiving aggressive treatment combining high doses of chemotherapy, despite the absence of evidence that such toxic therapy could change the fatal outcome of a cancer as advanced as his.
It was clear his treatment risked hastening his demise, or at least robbing him of the last tranquil days at home with his family and friends.
I would not ordinarily treat a patient with George's prognosis this way.
I entered George's room.
The sheets were drawn to his neck.
His eyes were closed and sunken, his skin ashen, his lips blackened.
For a moment, I wondered if he had died.
Then he slowly turned his head and noticed me.
With tears in his eyes, George struggled to speak.
" Don't talk," I said.
His eyes closed in assent.
George had suffered a severe side effect of the treatment.
I spent a few minutes with him, and as I departed, I thought how I would usually offer a patient words of encouragement, saying how vital it was to keep fighting against the cancer.
I knew that in some cases if the patient could endure the harsh treatment, the cancer might be eradicated.
But in George's case, such words seemed hollow.
So instead I left with platitudes, saying how much everyone missed him, how we all were thinking of him and hoping that soon he might find some relief.
For days I could not get George out of my mind.
I sought to replace the awful images from my last visit with memories of George Griffin in full health.
Sixty-one years old, a wiry man of middle height, with thinning gray hair and sharp features, he had ventured into the most remote corners of the world studying stomach cancer.
This interest deepened after his first wife died of colon cancer and George had married Eunha, a Korean pathologist.
Despite Eunha's pleas for him to rest, George came back to work two or three hours a day once the chemical burn from the high doses of chemotherapy had subsided.
He had lost nearly 30 pounds.
Then one day news moved like a shock of electricity through the clinical staff: George was scheduled for surgery. "
Why not just put a gun to his head? "
one colleague said bitterly.
The operation turned out to be even more extensive than expected: After removing the portion of the stomach with the tumor, the surgeon discovered the cancer had also extended its tentacles into the esophagus, and its lower third had to be sacrificed…
In the laboratory, pathologists began their work with George's removed stomach.
The tumor was dead; cancer cells were nowhere to be seen.
The textbook explanation was that the cancer was merely hiding.
While many cells had been destroyed by chemotherapy, many others would circulate in the blood and lymphatic system.
New masses would soon appear.
The cancer would fill his intestines and occupy his chest, until it killed him.
But George would not acknowledge this.
Not long after the surgery, he had himself again admitted to the hospital to undergo another round of even more toxic chemotherapy.
I was deeply saddened.
If I were George's doctor, I told myself, I would have taken Eunha aside and questioned the decision to resume chemotherapy.
Wasn't that the doctor's role, to protect George from more pointless treatment?
Thirteen years after George's cancer diagnosis, on a chill December day in 2000, I was sitting in the atrium café of a hospital.
I rose from my chair as I spied George.
Even after all this time, he was still gaunt.
But his eyes were animated and his voice strong as he greeted me warmly.
I carried a gnawing sense of guilt.
After all, I had written George off.
He would not be alive if my recommendations had been heeded.
I asked him if he had insisted on the radical treatments by ignoring the grim statistics.
" I knew exactly what the numbers were," he said.
He told me that when he returned home, he planted some daffodil bulbs that would bloom the coming spring. "
I told myself, maybe I'll get to see them flower, but likely I won't.
Then they will be for my grave. "
" Did you know that I and virtually the entire medical staff disagreed with the treatment? "
I asked.
" I did," George paused gravely, "and I knew the argument made in cases like mine.
Treatment would cause unnecessary suffering - for me and for my family.
Add in that it throws away society's money on a doomed person. "
His eyes narrowed, "I find these arguments patronizing.
I did even before I was ill.
It was my right to choose to do what I did. "
" Even if I didn't prevail," he went on, "it was my only chance.
I deeply wanted to live and had to fight.
Then I could tell myself that I had done everything possible. "
George's remarkable recovery was a turning point for me.
Since then I have come to believe that hope, true hope, is as important as any medication I might prescribe or any procedure I might perform.
To hope under the most extreme circumstances is an act of defiance that permits a person to live his life on his own terms.
It is part of the human spirit to endure and give a miracle a chance to happen.
Hope, I have come to believe, is as vital to our lives as the very oxygen that we breathe.
George Griffin knew this long before I did.
He was in the first third grade class I taught at Saint Mary's School in Morris, Minn. All 34 of my students were dear to me, but Mike Norton was one in a million.
Very neat in appearance, but had that happy-to-be-alive attitude that made even his occasional mischievousness delightful.
Mike talked incessantly.
I had to remind him again and again that talking without permission was not acceptable.
What impressed me so much, though, was his sincere response every time I had to correct him for misbehaving. "
Thank you for correcting me, Sister! "
I didn't know what to make of it at first, but before long I became accustomed to hearing it many times a day.
One morning my patience was growing thin when Mike talked once too often, and then I made a novice-teacher's mistake.
I looked at him and said, "If you say one more word, I am going to tape your mouth shut! "
It wasn't ten seconds later when Ben blurted out, "Mike is talking again. "
I hadn't asked any of the students to help me watch Mike, but since I had stated the punishment in front of the class, I had to act on it.
I remember the scene as if it had occurred this morning.
I walked to my desk, very deliberately opened my drawer and took out a roll of masking tape.
Without saying a word, I proceeded to Mike's desk, tore off two pieces of tape and made a big X with them over his mouth.
I then returned to the front of the room.
As I glanced at Mike to see how he was doing, he winked at me.
That did it!
I started laughing.
The class cheered as I walked back to Mike's desk, removed the tape and shrugged my shoulders.
His first words were, "Thank you for correcting me, Sister. "
At the end of the year I was asked to teach junior-high math.
The years flew by, and before I knew it Mike was in my classroom again.
He was more handsome than ever and just as polite.
Since he had to listen carefully to my instructions in the "new math", he did not talk as much in ninth grade as he had in the third.
One Friday, things just didn't feel right.
We had worked hard on a new concept all week, and I sensed that the students were frowning, frustrated with themselves, and edgy with one another.
I had to stop this crankiness before it got out of hand.
So I asked them to list the names of the other students in the room on two sheets of paper, leaving a space between each name.
Then I told them to think of the nicest thing they could say about each of their classmates and write it down.
It took the remainder of the class period to finish the assignment, and as the students left the room, each one handed me the papers.
Mike said, "Thank you for teaching me, Sister.
Have a good weekend. "
That Saturday, I wrote down the name of each student on a separate sheet of paper, and I listed what everyone else had said about that individual.
On Monday I gave each student his or her list.
Before long, the entire class was smiling. "
Really? "
I heard whispered. "
I never knew that meant anything to anyone!" "
I didn't know others liked me so much! "
No one ever mentioned those papers in class again.
I never knew if they discussed them after class or with their parents, but it didn't matter.
The exercise had accomplished its purpose.
The students were happy with themselves and on another again.
Several years later, after I returned from vacation, my parents met me at the airport.
As we were driving home, Mother asked me the usual questions about the trip, the weather, and my experiences in general.
There was a light lull in the conversation.
Mother gave Dad a side-ways glance and simply said, "Dad? "
My father cleared his throat as he usually did before something important. "
The Nortons called last night," he began. "
Really? "
I said. "
I haven't heard from them in years.
I wonder how Mike is. "
Dad responded quietly. "
Mike was killed in Vietnam," he said. "
The funeral is tomorrow, and his parents would like it if you could attend. "
I had never seen a serviceman in a military coffin before.
Mike looked so handsome, so mature.
All I could think at that moment was, Mike, I would give all the masking tape in the world if only you would talk to me.
The church was packed with Mike's friends.
The pastor said the usual prayers, and the bugler played tape.
One by one those who loved Mike took a last walk by the coffin and sprinkled it with holy water.
I was the last one to bless the coffin.
As I stood there, one of the soldiers who had acted as pallbearer came up to me. "
Were you Mike's math teacher? "
he asked.
I nodded as I continued to stare at the coffin. "
Mike talked about you a lot," he said.
After the funeral, most of Mike's former classmates headed to Ben's farmhouse for lunch.
Mike's mother and father were there, obviously waiting for me. "
We want to show you something," his father said, taking a wallet out of his pocket. "
They found this on Mike when he was killed.
We thought you might recognize it. "
Opening the billfold, he carefully removed two worn pieces of notebook paper that had obviously been taped, folded and refolded many times.
I knew without looking that the papers were the ones on which I had listed all the good things each of Mike's classmates had said about him. "
Thank you so much for doing that," Mike's mother said. "
As you can see, Mike treasured it. "
Mike's classmates started to gather around us.
Charles smiled rather sheepishly and said, "I still have my list.
It's in the top drawer of my desk at home. "
Ben's wife said, "Ben asked me to put this in our wedding album." "
I have mine too," Mary said. "
It's in my diary. "
Then John, another classmate, reached into his pocket, took out his wallet and showed his worn and frazzled list to the group. "
I carry this with me at all times," John said without batting an eyelash. "
I think we all saved our lists. "
That's when I finally sat down and cried.
I cried for Mike and for all his friends who would never see him again.
The purpose of this story is to encourage everyone to compliment the people you love and care about.
We often tend to forget the importance of showing our affections and love.
Sometimes the smallest of things could mean the most to another.
Please spread this story around, to express your love and caring by complimenting and being open with communication.
The density of people in society is so thick, that we forget that life will end one day and we don't know when that one day will be.
Tell them, before it is too late.
All you remember about your child being an infant is the incredible awe you felt about the precious miracle you created.
You remember having plenty of time to bestow all your wisdom and knowledge.
You thought your child would take all of your advice and make fewer mistakes, and be much smarter than you were.
You wished for your child to hurry and grow up.
All you remember about your child being two is never using the rest room alone or getting to watch a movie without talking animals.
You recall afternoons talking on the phone while crouching in the bedroom closet, and being convinced your child would be the first Ivy League college student to graduate wearing pullovers at the ceremony.
You remember worrying about the bag of M&M's melting in your pocket and ruining your good dress.
You wished for your child to be more independent.
All you remember about your child being five is the first day of school and finally having the house to yourself.
You remember joining the PTA and being elected president when you left a meeting to use the rest room.
You remember being asked, "Is Santa real?"
and saying "yes" because he had to be for a little bit longer.
All you remember about your child being seven is the car pool schedule.
You learned to apply make up in two minutes and brush your teeth in the rear-view mirror because the only times you had to yourself was when you were stopped at red lights.
You considered painting your car yellow and posting a "taxi" sign on the lawn next to the garage door.
You remember people staring at you, the few times you were out of the car, because you kept flexing your foot and making acceleration noises.
You wished for the day your child would learn how to drive.
All you remember about your child being ten is managing the school fund-raisers.
You sold wrapping paper for paint, T-shirts for new furniture, and magazine subscriptions for shade trees in the school playground.
You remember storing a hundred cases of candy bars in the garage to sell so the school band could get new uniforms, and how they melted together on an unseasonably warm spring afternoon.
You wished your child would grow out of playing an instrument.
All you remember about your child being twelve is sitting in the stands during baseball practice and hoping your child's team would strike out fast because you had more important things to do at home.
The coach didn't understand how busy you were.
You wished the baseball season would be over soon.
All you remember about your child being fourteen is being asked not to stop the car in front of the school in the morning.
You had to drive two blocks further and unlock the doors without coming to a complete stop.
You remember not getting to kiss your child goodbye or talking to him in front of his friends.
You wished your child would be more mature.
All you remember about your child being sixteen is loud music and undecipherable lyrics screamed to a rhythmic beat.
You wished for your child to grow up and leave home with the stereo.
All you remember about your child being eighteen is the day they were born and having all the time in the world.
And, as you walk through your quiet house, you wonder where they went and you wish your child hadn't grown up so fast.
" No air conditioning?
How can you sleep? "
a friend asks, horrified.
I've just revealed that my family has decided to shut the air conditioner off and trim our electric bill.
" Nobody opens a window, day or night," warns another friend, whose windows have been painted shut for a decade. "
This is the 90s.
It's not safe. "
On this first night of our cost-cutting adventure, it's only 30°C.
We're not going to suffer, but the three kids grumble anyway.
" How do you open these windows? "
my husband asks.
Jiggling the metal tabs, he finally releases one.
A potpourri of bug bodies decorates the sills.
As we spring the windows one by one, the night noises howl outside - and in.
" It's too hot to sleep," my 13-year-old daughter moans.
" I'm about to die from this heat," her brother hollers down the hall.
" Just try it tonight," I tell them.
In truth I'm too tired to argue for long.
I'm exhausted after attending Grandma's estate auction.
I toted home her oval tin bathtub and the chair I once stood on like a big shot behind the counter of her store.
My face is sweaty, but I lie quietly listening to the cricket choirs outside that remind me of childhood.
The neighbor's dog howls.
Probably a trespassing squirrel.
It's been years since I've taken the time to really listen to the night.
I think about Grandma, who lived to 92 and still supervised Mom's gardening until just a few weeks before she died.
And then, I'm back there at her house in the summer heat of my childhood.
I move my pillow to the foot of Grandma's bed and angle my face toward the open window.
I flip the pillow, hunting for the cooler side.
Grandma sees me thrashing. "
If you'll just watch for the breeze," she says, "you'll cool off and fall asleep. "
She cranks up the venetian blinds.
I stare at the filmy white curtain, willing it to flutter.
Lying still, waiting, I suddenly notice the life outside the window.
The bugs chorus.
Neighbors, porch-sitting late, speak in hazy words that soothe me.
Sleepy-eyed now, I focus on the curtain.
It flutters…
" Mom, did you hear that? "
my seven-year-old son blurts, "I think it was an owl family. "
" Probably," I tell him, "just keep listening…"
Without the droning air conditioner, the house is oddly peaceful, and the unfiltered night noises seem close enough to touch.
I hope I'm awake tonight when the first breeze sneaks in.
Several years ago, while attending a communications course, I experienced a most unusual process.
The instructor asked us to list anything in our past that we felt ashamed of, guilty about, regretted, or incomplete about.
The next week he invited participants to read their lists aloud.
This seemed like a very private process, but there's always some brave soul in the crowd who will volunteer.
As people read their lists, mine grew longer.
After three weeks, I had 101 items on my list, the instructor then suggested that we find ways to make amends, apologize to people, or take some action to right any wrongdoing.
I was seriously wondering how this could ever improve my communications, having visions of alienating just about everyone from my life.
The next week, the man next to me raised his hand and volunteered this story.
" While making my list, I remembered an incident from high school.
I grew up in a small town in California.
There was a sheriff in town that none of us kids liked.
One night, my two buddies and I decided to play a trick on Sheriff Smith.
After drinking a few beers, we found a can of red paint, climbed the tall water tank in the middle of town, and wrote, on the tank, in bright red letters: Sheriff Smith is an s. o. b. The next day, the town arose to see our glorious sign.
Within two hours, Sheriff Smith had my two pals and me in his office.
My friends confessed and I lied, denying the truth.
No one ever found out.
" Nearly 20 years later, Sheriff Smith's name appears on my list.
I didn't even know if he was still alive.
Last weekend, I dialed information in my hometown back in California.
Sure enough, there was a Roger Smith still listed.
I dialed his number.
After a few rings, I heard: 'Hello?'
I said. '
Sheriff Smith?'
Pause. '
Yup.' '
Well, this is Jimmy White.
And I want you to know that I did it.'
Pause. '
I knew it!'
he yelled back.
We had a good laugh and a lively discussion.
His closing words were: 'Jimmy, I always felt badly for you because your buddies got it off their chest, and I knew you were carrying it around all these years.
I want to thank you for calling me… for your sake.' "
Jimmy inspired me to clear up all 101 items on my list.
It took me almost two years, but it became the springboard and true inspiration for my career as a conflict mediator.
No matter how difficult the conflict, crisis or situation, I always remember that it's never too late to clear up the past and begin resolution.
Your world is as big as you make it.
I know, for I used to abide
In the narrowest nest in a corner,
My wings pressing close to my side.
But I sighted the distant horizon
Where the sky line encircled the sea,
And I throbbed with a burning desire
To travel this immensity.
I battered the cordons around me
And cradled my wings on the breeze,
Then soared to the uttermost reaches
With rapture, with power, with ease!
Henry Ford didn't always pay attention in school.
One day, he and a friend took a watch apart.
Angry and upset, the teacher told him both to stay after school.
Their punishment was to stay until they had fixed the watch.
But the teacher did not know young Ford's genius.
In ten minutes, this mechanical wizard had repaired the watch and was on his way home.
Ford was always interested in how things worked.
He once plugged up the spout of a teapot and placed it on the fire.
Then he waited to see what would happen.
The water boiled and, of course, turned to steam.
Since the steam had no way to escape, the teapot exploded.
The explosion cracked a mirror and broke a window.
The young inventor was badly scalded.
Ford's year of curiosity and tinkering paid off.
He dreamed of a horseless carriage.
When he built one, the world of transportation was changed forever.
I am sitting at the airport watching people in the last minutes before their loved ones arrive or depart.
They are pacing, nervous, looking at one another.
The emotion is intense.
A woman, speaking Spanish, is running in circles trying to gather family members together for a goodbye.
Her voice is high-pitched.
When the final moment comes before boarding, she wraps her arms round her son, giving him a powerful embrace that should protect him until she returns.
At Gate 13, the arrivals are just coming in.
" I see her.
There she is. "
Just as poignant, the arrivals fold into the mix of people waiting for them.
There are tears and smiles, pure delight ringing in the laughter of seeing someone who has been gone.
I sit, glancing at my book, waiting for my turn to leave, alone because the ones I love have a different schedule from mine, and the one I am going to see, my daughter, is at the other end of my journey.
I think of other departures and arrivals.
I recall seeing my daughter, the daughter I am now going to visit, coming down that corridor with her backpack slung on one shoulder, her overstuffed hold all cradled in her arms, her headphones making her oblivious to the stream of people flowing along with her.
She was in her first year at university, coming home for the first time.
I wrapped myself round her as if she'd been lost to me.
Today my flight is two hours late.
The book I am reading is not as interesting as the people leaving and coming, coming and leaving.
A little boy of about five is meeting his grandfather for the first time.
He looks up and up at the face of a man who is not that tall, except to a child.
Joy shines down and up, and I am wondering how one would capture this moment in word or film.
When my flight is finally called, I gather my books and hand luggage.
Since there is no one to see me off, I do not look back to see where I have come from.
Instead, I think of my husband at work wondering if I have left yet, and my daughter at the other end wondering the same thing.
As I head towards the plane, I find myself remembering yet another arrival and departure.
When I was a newlywed, my 91-year-old grandfather died.
We had been very close, and one evening, returning from his funeral, I arrived in the airport crying.
My husband of only a year was waiting at the gate to take me in his arms.
Because of my tears, everyone was looking at us, but I didn't care.
Somehow the emotion I felt seemed not at all out of place for the airport.
Life needs to be this important all the time.
I wish that all the people who went on a journey could come back to find someone waiting for them.
I also wish they could leave with someone to see them off.
She had been shopping with her mom in Walmart.
She must have been 6 years old, this beautiful brown haired, freckle-faced image of innocence.
It was pouring outside.
The kind of rain that gushes over the top of rain gutters, so much in a hurry to hit the Earth it has no time to flow down the spout.
We all stood there under the awning and just inside the door of the Walmart.
We waited, some patiently, others irritated because nature messed up their hurried day.
I am always mesmerized by rainfall.
I get lost in the sound and sight of the heavens washing away the dirt and dust of the world.
Memories of running, splashing so carefree as a child come pouring in as a welcome reprieve from the worries of my day.
Her voice was so sweet as it broke the hypnotic trance we were all caught in, "Mom, let's run through the rain," she said.
"What? "
Mom asked.
"Let's run through the rain!"
she repeated.
" No, honey, we'll wait until it slows down a bit," Mom replied.
This young child waited about another minute and repeated, "Mom, let's run through the rain. "
" We'll get soaked if we do," Mom said.
" No, we won't, Mom.
That's not what you said this morning," the young girl said as she tugged at her mom's arm.
" This morning?
When did I say we could run through the rain and not get wet? "
" Don't you remember?
When you were talking to Daddy about his cancer, you said, 'If God can get us through this, he can get us through anything!' "
The entire crowd stopped dead silent.
I swear you couldn't hear anything but the rain.
We all stood silently.
No one came or left in the next few minutes.
Mom paused and thought for a moment about what she would say.
Now some would laugh it off and scold her for being silly.
Some might even ignore what was said.
But this was a moment of affirmation in a young child's life.
A moment when innocent trust can be nurtured so that it will bloom into faith. "
Honey, you are absolutely right.
Let's run through the rain.
If we get wet, well, maybe we just needed washing," Mom said.
Then off they ran.
We all stood watching, smiling and laughing as they darted past the cars.
They held their shopping bags over their heads just in case.
They got soaked.
But they were followed by a few who screamed and laughed like children all the way to their cars.
And yes, I did.
I ran.
I got wet.
I needed washing.
Circumstances or people can take away your material possessions, they can take away your money, and they can take away your health.
But no one can ever take away your precious memories.
So, don't forget to make time and take the opportunities to make memories every day!
To everything there is a season and a time to every purpose under heaven.
I hope you still take the time to run through the rain.
Several times my daughter had telephoned to say, "Mother, you must come to see the daffodils before they are over. "
I wanted to go, but it was two-hour drive from Laguna to Lake Arrowhead.
" I will come next Tuesday," I promised, a little reluctantly, on her third call.
Next Tuesday dawned cold and rainy.
Still, I had promised, and so I drove there.
When I finally walked into Carolyn's house and hugged and greeted my grandchildren, I said, "Forget the daffodils, Carolyn!
The road is invisible in the clouds and fog, and there is nothing in the world except you and these children that I want to see badly enough to drive another inch! "
My daughter smiled calmly and said, "We drive in this all the time, Mother. "
" Well, you won't get me back on the road until it clears, and then I'm heading for home! "
I assured her.
" I was hoping you'd take me over to the garage to pick up my car. "
" How far will we have to drive? "
" Just a few blocks," Carolyn said, "I'll drive.
I'm used to this. "
After several minutes, I had to ask, "Where are we going?
This isn't the way to the garage!" "
We're going to my garage the long way," Carolyn smiled, "by way of the daffodils. "
" Carolyn," I said sternly, "please turn around. "
" It's all right, Mother, I promise.
You will never forgive yourself if you miss this experience. "
After about twenty minutes, we turned onto a small gravel road and I saw a small church.
On the far side of the church, I saw a hand-lettered sign that read, "Daffodil Garden".
We got out of the car and each took a child's hand, and I followed Carolyn down the path.
Then, we turned a corner of the path, and I looked up and gasped.
Before me lay the most glorious sight.
It looked as though someone had taken a great vat of gold and poured it down over the mountain peak and slopes.
The flowers were planted in majestic, swirling patterns - great ribbons and swaths of deep orange, white, lemon yellow, salmon pink, saffron, and butter yellow.
Each different-colored variety was planted as a group so that it swirled and flowed like its own river with its own unique hue.
There were five acres of flowers.
" But who has done this? "
I asked Carolyn.
" It's just one woman," Carolyn answered, "she lives on the property.
That's her home. "
Carolyn pointed to a well-kept A-frame house that looked small and modest in the midst of all that glory.
We walked up to the house.
On the patio, we saw a poster. "
Answers to the Questions I Know You Are Asking" was the headline.
The first answer was a simple one. "
50,000 bulbs," it read.
The second answer was, "One bulb at a time, by one woman.
Two hands, two feet, and a very little brain. "
The third answer was, "Began in 1958. "
There it was, the Daffodil Principle.
For me, that moment was a life-changing experience.
I thought of this woman whom I had never met, who, more than thirty-five years before, had begun - one bulb at a time - to bring her vision of beauty and joy to an obscure mountain top.
Just planting one bulb at a time, year after year, this unknown woman had forever changed the world in which she lived.
She had created something of ineffable magnificence, beauty, and inspiration.
The principle her daffodil garden taught is one of the greatest principles of celebration.
That is, learning to move toward our goals and desires one step at a time often just one baby-step at a time - and learning to love the doing, learning to use the accumulation of time.
When we multiply tiny pieces of time with small increments of daily effort, we too will find we can accomplish magnificent things.
We can change the world.
" It makes me sad in a way," I admitted to Carolyn. "
What might I have accomplished if I had thought of a wonderful goal thirty-five years ago and had worked away at it 'one bulb at a time' through all those years?
Just think what I might have been able to achieve! "
My daughter summed up the message of the day in her direct way. "
Start tomorrow," she said.
When storm clouds rumble in the sky and June showers come down,
The moist east wind comes marching over the heath to blow its bagpipes among the bamboos.
Then crowds of flowers come out of a sudden, from nobody knows where, and dance upon the grass in wild glee.
Mother, I really think the flowers go to school underground.
They do their lessons with doors shut, and if they want to come out to play before it is time, their master makes them stand in a corner.
When the rains come they have their holidays.
Branches clash together in the forest, and the leaves rustle in the wild wind, the thunder-clouds clap their giant hands and the flower children rush out in dresses of pink and yellow and white.
Do you know, mother, their home is in the sky, where the stars are.
Haven't you seen how eager they are to get there?
Don't you know why they are in such a hurry?
Of course, I can guess to whom they raise their arms: they have their mother as I have my own.
We were standing at the top of a church tower.
My father had brought me to this spot in a small Italian town not far from our home in Rome.
I wondered why.
"Look down, Sara," Father said.
I gathered all my courage and looked down.
I saw the square in the center of the village.
And I saw the crisscross of twisting, turning streets leading to the square.
" See, my dear," Father said gently, "there is more than one way to the square.
Life is like that.
If you can't get to the place where you want to go by one road, try another. "
Now I understood why I was there.
Earlier that day I had begged my mother to do something about the awful lunches that were served at school.
But she refused because she could not believe the lunches were as bad as I said.
When I turned to Father for help, he would not interfere.
Instead, he brought me to this high tower to give me a lesson.
By the time we reached home, I had a plan.
At school the next day, I secretly poured my luncheon soup into a bottle and brought it home.
Then I talked the cook into serving it to Mother at dinner.
The plan worked perfectly.
She swallowed one spoonful and sputtered, "The cook must have gone mad!"
Quickly I told what I had done, and Mother stated firmly that she would take up the matter of lunches at school the next day!
In the years that followed I often remembered the lesson Father taught me.
I knew where I wanted to go in life.
I wanted to be a fashion designer.
And on the way to my first small success I found the road blocked.
What could I do?
Accept the roadblock and fail?
Or use imagination and wits to find another road to my goal?
I had come to Paris, the center of the world of fashion, with my sketches.
But none of the famous fashion designers seemed interested in buying them.
Then one day I met a friend who was wearing a very beautiful sweater.
It was plain in color, but it had a lovely and unusual stitch.
" Did you knit that sweater? "
I asked her.
" No," she answered, "it was done by a woman here in Paris. "
" What an interesting stitch! "
I continued.
My friend had an explanation, "The woman - her name is Mrs. Norman - told me she learned the stitch in Armenia, her native country. "
Suddenly I pictured a daring design knitted into such a sweater.
Then an even more daring idea came to me.
Why not open my own house of fashion?
Why not design, make and sell clothes from the house of Schiaparelli!
I would do it, and I would begin with a sweater.
I drew a bold black and white butterfly pattern and took it to Mrs. Norman.
She knitted it into a sweater.
The result, I thought, was wonderful.
I wore the sweater to a luncheon which people in the fashion business would attend.
To my great pleasure, the sweater was noticed.
In fact, the representative of a large New York store wanted 40 sweaters to be ready in two weeks.
I accepted the order and walked out on a cloud of happiness.
My cloud disappeared suddenly, however, when I stood in front of Mrs. Norman. "
But it took me almost a week to knit that one sweater," she said, "forty sweaters in two weeks?
It is not possible! "
I was crushed to be so close to success and then to be blocked!
Sadly I walked away.
All at once I stopped short.
There must be another way.
This stitch did take special skill.
But surely there must be other Armenian women in Paris who knew how to do it.
I went back to Mrs. Norman and explained my plan.
She really didn't think it would work, but she agreed to help.
We were like detectives, Mrs. Norman and I. We put ourselves on the trail of any Armenians who lived in Paris.
One friend led us to another.
At last we tracked down 20 women, each of whom could knit the special stitch.
Two weeks later, the sweaters were finished.
And the first shipment from the new house of Schiaparelli was on its way to the United States!
From that day a steady stream of clothes and perfumes flowed from the house of Schiaparelli.
I found the world of fashion gay and exciting, full of challenge and adventure.
I shall never forget one showing which was really a challenge.
Once again Father's advice helped me.
I was busy getting ready to show my winter fashions.
Then just 13 days before the presentation the sewing girls were called out on strike.
I found myself left with one tailor and the woman who was in charge of the sewing room!
I was as gloomy as my models and salesgirls. "
We'll never make it," one of them cried.
Here, I thought, is the test of all tests for Father's advice.
Where is the way out this time?
I wondered and worried.
I was certain we would have to call off the presentation or else show the clothes unfinished.
Then it dawned on me.
Why not show the clothes unfinished?
We worked hurriedly.
And, exactly 13 days later, right on time, the Schiaparelli showing took place.
What a showing it was!
Some coats had no sleeves; others had only one.
Many of our clothes were still in an early stage.
They were only patterns made of heavy cotton cloth.
But on these we pinned sketches and pieces of material.
In this way we were able to show that what colors and textures the clothes would have when they were finished.
All in all, the showing was different.
It was so different that it was a great success.
Our unusual showing caught the attention of the public, and orders for the clothes poured in.
Father's wise words had guided me once again.
There is more than one way to the square always.
I love you not because of who you are, but because of who I am when I am with you.
No man or woman is worth your tears, and the one who is, won't make you cry.
The worst way to miss someone is to be sitting right beside them knowing you can't have them.
Never frown, even when you are sad, because you never know who is falling in love with your smile.
To the world you may be one person, but to one person you may be the world.
Don't waste your time on a man/woman, who isn't willing to waste his/her time on you.
Just because someone doesn't love you the way you want them to, doesn't mean they don't love you with all they have.
Don't try hard, the best things come when you least expect them.
Maybe God wants us to meet a few wrong people before meeting the right one, so that when we finally meet the person, we will know how to be grateful.
Don't cry because it is over, smile because it happened.
Life is a pure flame, and we live by an invisible sun within us.
A young man was getting ready to graduate from college.
For many months he had admired a beautiful sports car in a dealer's showroom, and knowing his father could well afford it, he told him that was all he wanted.
As Graduation Day approached, the young man awaited signs that his father had purchased the car.
Finally, on the morning of his graduation, his father called him into his private study.
His father told him how proud he was to have such a fine son, and told him how much he loved him.
He handed his son a beautifully wrapped gift box.
Curious, and somewhat disappointed, the young man opened the box and found a lovely leather-bound Bible, with the young man's name embossed in gold.
Angry, he raised his voice to his father and said, "With all your money, you give me a Bible? "
And stormed out of the house, leaving the Bible.
Many years passed and the young man was very successful in business.
He had a beautiful home and a wonderful family, but realized his father was getting old, and thought perhaps he should go to see him.
He had not seen him since that graduation day.
Before he could make arrangements, he received a telegram telling him his father had passed away, and willed all of his possessions to his son.
He needed to come home immediately and take care of things.
When he arrived at his father's house, sudden sadness and regret filled his heart.
He began to search through his father's important papers and saw the still gift-wrapped Bible, just as he had left it years ago.
With tears, he opened the Bible and began to turn the pages.
As he was reading, a car key dropped from the Bible.
It had a tag with the dealer's name, the same dealer who had the sports car he had desired.
On the tag was the date of his graduation and the words PAID IN FULL.
How many times do we miss blessings?
Do not spoil what you have by desiring what you have not; but remember that what you now have was once among the things you only hope for.
All of us have read thrilling stories in which the hero had only a limited and specified time to live.
Sometimes it was as long as a year; sometimes as short as twenty-four hours.
But always we were interested in discovering just how the doomed man chose to spend his last days or his last hours.
I speak, of course, of free men who have a choice, not condemned criminals whose sphere of activities is strictly delimited.
Such stories set us thinking, wondering what we should do under similar circumstances.
What events, what experiences, what associations should we crowd into those last hours as mortal beings?
What happiness should we find in reviewing the past, what regrets?
Sometimes I have thought it would be an excellent rule to live each day as if we should die tomorrow.
Such an attitude would emphasize sharply the values of life.
We should live each day with gentleness, vigor, and a keenness of appreciation which are often lost when time stretches before us in the constant panorama of more days and months and years to come.
There are those, of course, who would adopt the Epicurean motto of "Eat, drink, and be merry. "
But most people would be chastened by the certainty of impending death.
In stories the doomed hero is usually saved at the last minute by some stroke of fortune, but almost always his sense of values is changed.
He becomes more appreciative of the meaning of life and its permanent spiritual values.
It has often been noted that those who live, or have lived, in the shadow of death bring a mellow sweetness to everything they do.
Most of us, however, take life for granted.
We know that one day we must die, but usually we picture that day as far in the future.
When we are in buoyant health, death is all but unimaginable.
We seldom think of it.
The days stretch out in an endless vista.
So we go about our petty tasks, hardly aware of our listless attitude toward life.
The same lethargy, I am afraid, characterizes the use of all our faculties and senses.
Only the deaf appreciate hearing, only the blind realize the manifold blessings that lie in sight.
Particularly does this observation apply to those who have lost sight and hearing in adult life.
But those who have never suffered impairment of sight or hearing seldom make the fullest use of these blessed faculties.
Their eyes and ears take in all sights and sounds hazily, without concentration and with little appreciation.
It is the same old story of not being grateful for what we have until we lose it, of not being conscious of health until we are ill.
I have often thought it would be a blessing if each human being were stricken blind and deaf for a few days at some time during his early adult life.
Darkness would make him more appreciative of sight; silence would teach him the joys of sound.
One day a wealthy family man took his son on a trip to the country, so he could have his son see how poor country people were.
They stayed one day and one night in the farmhouse of a very humble farm.
On the way back home at the end of the trip the father asked the son, "What did you think of the trip? "
The son replied, "Very nice, Dad. "
The father then asked, "Did you notice how poor they were? "
The son replied, "Yes, I guess so. "
The father then added, "And what did you learn? "
To this question, the son thought for a moment and answered slowly, "I learned that we have one dog in the house and they have four.
We have a fountain in the garden and they have a stream that has no end.
" We have fancy lanterns in our garden, while they have the stars.
Our garden goes to the edge of our yard, but for their backyard they have the entire horizon! "
At the end of the son's reply, the rich father was speechless.
His son then added: "Thanks, Dad, for showing me how poor we really are. "
Isn't it true that all depends on the lens you use to see life?
If you have love, friends, family, health, good humor and a positive attitude toward life, you've got everything!
You can't buy any of these things.
You can have all the material possessions you can imagine, provisions for the future, but if you are poor of spirit, you have nothing!
Accidentally, a lily seed dropped in the wheat field.
The seed budded, shot out the slender stems and leaves, grew the buds and bloomed the pure white flowers.
Looking at the uniform wheat seedlings surrounding it, the lily was so proud, "Look, you're all ordinary wheat seedlings and your value is to yield several ears of wheat and become the food of mankind.
As for me, I'm the noble lily, who is the symbol of purity, so you can't compare with me…"
The lily was so pleased with itself while the wheat seedlings remained silent.
At this moment, a farmer went over.
He took no interest in flowers.
He only had the crops in his eyes, so the beautiful lily was only a weed.
He pulled out the lily right away and threw it off on the ridge of the field.
The lily was insolated by the scorching sun and gradually withered.
I believe you are so excellent and the people around you are not as good as you.
Perhaps you are a lily, but are you wrong to grow in the wheat field?
The lily growing in the wheat field is a weed.
You'd better consider in earnest where your proper position is.
Once upon a time, there was an island where all the feelings lived: Happiness, Sadness, Vanity, and all of the others, including Love.
One day it was announced to the feelings that the island would sink, so all repaired their boats and left.
Except for Love.
Love wanted to persevere until the last possible moment.
When the island was almost sinking, Love decided to ask for help.
Richness was passing by Love in a grand boat.
Love said, "Richness, can you take me with you?"
Richness answered, "No, I can't.
There is a lot of gold and silver in my boat.
There is no place here for you. "
Love decided to ask Vanity who was also passing by in a beautiful vessel, "Vanity, please help me!" "
I can't help you, Love.
You are all wet and might damage my boat," Vanity answered.
Sadness was close by, so Love asked for help, "Sadness, let me go with you." "
Oh… Love, I am so sad that I need to be by myself! "
Happiness passed by Love, too, but she was so happy that she did not even hear when Love called her!
Suddenly, there was a voice, "Come, Love, I will take you. "
It was an elder.
Love felt so blessed and overjoyed that he even forgot to ask the elder his name.
When they arrived at dry land, the elder went his own way.
Love realized how much he owed the elder and asked Knowledge, another elder, "Who helped me? "
" It was Time," Knowledge answered.
"Time? "
asked Love, "but why did Time help me? "
Knowledge smiled with deep wisdom and answered, "Because only Time is capable of understanding how valuable Love is. "
It is spring again and the windows can be left open as often as one would like.
As spring comes in through the windows, so people - unable to bear staying inside any longer - go outdoors.
The spring outside, however, is much too cheap, for the sun shines on everything, and so does not seem as bright as that which shoots into the darkness of the house.
Outside the sun-slothed breeze blows everywhere, but it is not so lively as that which stirs the gloominess inside the house.
Even the chirping of the birds sounds so thin and broken that the quietness of the house is needed to set it off.
It seems that spring was always meant to be put behind a windowpane for show, just like a picture in a frame.
At the same time it also becomes clear that the door has a different significance from the windows.
Of course, doors were made for people to pass through; but a window can also sometimes serve as an entrance or as an exit, and is used as such by thieves and by lovers in novels.
In fact the fundamental difference between a door and a window has nothing to do with them being either entrances or exits.
When it comes to the admiration of spring, it could be put this way: a door makes it possible for one to go out, whereas a window makes it possible for one not to have to.
A window helps to pull down the partition between man and nature.
It leads breezes and sunlight in, and keeps part of the spring in the house.
It allows one to sit and enjoy the spring in peace, and makes it unnecessary to go looking for it outside.
In the busy city of Los Angeles, on a Friday night, a poor young violinist stood at the gate of the subway station, playing his violin.
Though the music was great, people were quickly going home for the weekend.
In this case, many of them slowed down their paces and put some money into the hat of the young man.
The next day, the young violinist came to the gate of the subway station, and put his hat on the ground gracefully.
Different from that the day before, he took out a large piece of paper and laid it on the ground and put some stones on it.
Then he adjusted the violin and began playing.
It seemed more pleasant to listen to.
Before long, the young violinist was surrounded with people, who were all attracted by the words on that paper.
It said, "Last night, a gentleman named George Sang put an important thing into my hat by mistaken.
Please come to claim it soon. "
Seeing this, it caused great excitement and people wondered what it could be.
After about half an hour, a middle-aged man ran there in a hurry and rushed through the crowd to the violinist and grabbed his shoulders and said, "Yes, it's you.
You did come here.
I knew that you're an honest man and would certainly come here. "
The young violinist asked calmly, "Are you Mr. George Sang? "
The man nodded.
The violinist asked, "Did you lose something? "
"Lottery.
It's lottery," said the man.
The violinist took out a lottery ticket on which George Sang's name was seen. "
Is it?"
he asked.
George nodded promptly and seized the lottery ticket and kissed it, then he danced with the violinist.
The story turned out to be this: George Sang is an office clerk.
He bought a lottery ticket issued by a bank a few days ago.
The awards opened yesterday and he won a prize of $500,000.
So he felt very happy after work and felt the music was so wonderful, that he took out 50 dollars and put it in the hat.
However the lottery ticket was also thrown in.
The violinist was a student at an Arts College and had planned to attend advanced studies in Vienna.
He had booked the ticket and would fly that morning.
However when he was cleaning up he found the lottery ticket.
Thinking that the owner would return to look for it, he cancelled the flight and came back to where he was given the lottery ticket.
Later someone asked the violinist: "At that time you were in need to pay the tuition fee and you had to play the violin in the subway station every day to make the money.
Then why didn't you take the lottery ticket for yourself? "
The violinist said, "Although I don't have much money, I live happily; but if I lose honesty I won't be happy forever. "
Charles Plumb was a U. S. Navy jet pilot.
After 75 combat missions, his plane was destroyed by a surface-to-air missile.
Plumb ejected and parachuted into enemy hands.
He was captured and spent six years in the prison.
He survived the ordeal and now lectures on the lessons he learned from that experience.
One day, when Plumb and his wife were sitting in a restaurant, a man at another table came up and said, "You're Plumb!
You flew jet fighters from the Aircraft Carrier Kitty Hawk.
You were shotdown! "
" How in the world did you know that?"
asked Plumb. "
I packed your parachute," the man replied.
Plumb gasped in surprise and gratitude.
The man pumped his hand and said, "I guess it worked!"
Plumb assured him, "It sure did.
If your chute hadn't worked, I wouldn't be here today. "
Plumb couldn't sleep that night, thinking about that man.
Plumb says, "I kept wondering what he might have looked like in a Navy uniform: a white hat, a bib in the back, and bell-bottom trousers.
I wonder how many times I might have seen him and not even said, 'Good morning, how are you?'
or anything because, you see, I was a fighter pilot and he was just 'a sailor'. "
Plumb thought of the many hours the sailor had spent on a long wooden table in the bowels of the ship, carefully weaving the shrouds and folding the silks of each chute, holding in his hands each time the fate of someone he didn't know.
Now, Plumb asks his audience, "Who's packing your parachute?"
Everyone has someone who provides what they need to make it through the day.
Plumb also points out that he needed many kinds of parachutes when his plane was shot down over enemy territory - he needed his physical parachute, his mental parachute, his emotional parachute, and his spiritual parachute.
He called on all these supports before reaching safety.
Sometimes in the daily challenges that life gives us, we miss what is really important.
We may fail to say hello, please, or thank you, to congratulate people on something wonderful that has happened to them, to give a compliment, or just to do something nice for no reason.
As you go through this week, this month, and this year, recognize people who pack your parachutes and send them your gratitude.