"No need to go to any great trouble for me," she protested, when I had seated her in Wolf Larsen's arm-chair, which I had dragged hastily from his cabin.
"The men were looking for land at any moment this morning, and the vessel should be in by night; don't you think so?"
Her simple faith in the immediate future took me aback.
How could I explain to her the situation, the strange man who stalked the sea like Destiny, all that it had taken me months to learn?
But I answered honestly:
"If it were any other captain except ours, I should say you would be ashore in Yokohama to-morrow.
But our captain is a strange man, and I beg of you to be prepared for anything - understand?
- for anything."
"I - I confess I hardly do understand," she hesitated, a perturbed but not frightened expression in her eyes.
"Or is it a misconception of mine that shipwrecked people are always shown every consideration?
This is such a little thing, you know.
We are so close to land."
"Candidly, I do not know," I strove to reassure her.
"I wished merely to prepare you for the worst, if the worst is to come.
This man, this captain, is a brute, a demon, and one can never tell what will be his next fantastic act."
I was growing excited, but she interrupted me with an "Oh, I see," and her voice sounded weary.
To think was patently an effort.
She was clearly on the verge of physical collapse.
She asked no further questions, and I vouchsafed no remark, devoting myself to Wolf Larsen's command, which was to make her comfortable.
I bustled about in quite housewifely fashion, procuring soothing lotions for her sunburn, raiding Wolf Larsen's private stores for a bottle of port I knew to be there, and directing Thomas Mugridge in the preparation of the spare state-room.
The wind was freshening rapidly, the Ghost heeling over more and more, and by the time the state-room was ready she was dashing through the water at a lively clip.
I had quite forgotten the existence of Leach and Johnson, when suddenly, like a thunderclap, "Boat ho!"
came down the open companion-way.
It was Smoke's unmistakable voice, crying from the masthead.
I shot a glance at the woman, but she was leaning back in the arm-chair, her eyes closed, unutterably tired.
I doubted that she had heard, and I resolved to prevent her seeing the brutality I knew would follow the capture of the deserters.
She was tired.
Very good.
She should sleep.
There were swift commands on deck, a stamping of feet and a slapping of reef-points as the Ghost shot into the wind and about on the other tack.
As she filled away and heeled, the arm-chair began to slide across the cabin floor, and I sprang for it just in time to prevent the rescued woman from being spilled out.
Her eyes were too heavy to suggest more than a hint of the sleepy surprise that perplexed her as she looked up at me, and she half stumbled, half tottered, as I led her to her cabin.
Mugridge grinned insinuatingly in my face as I shoved him out and ordered him back to his galley work; and he won his revenge by spreading glowing reports among the hunters as to what an excellent "lydy's-myde" I was proving myself to be.
She leaned heavily against me, and I do believe that she had fallen asleep again between the arm-chair and the state-room.
This I discovered when she nearly fell into the bunk during a sudden lurch of the schooner.
She aroused, smiled drowsily, and was off to sleep again; and asleep I left her, under a heavy pair of sailor's blankets, her head resting on a pillow I had appropriated from Wolf Larsen's bunk.
I came on deck to find the Ghost heading up close on the port tack and cutting in to windward of a familiar spritsail close-hauled on the same tack ahead of us.
All hands were on deck, for they knew that something was to happen when Leach and Johnson were dragged aboard.
It was four bells.
Louis came aft to relieve the wheel.
There was a dampness in the air, and I noticed he had on his oilskins.
"What are we going to have?"
I asked him.
"A healthy young slip of a gale from the breath iv it, sir," he answered, "with a splatter iv rain just to wet our gills an' no more."
"Too bad we sighted them," I said, as the Ghost's bow was flung off a point by a large sea and the boat leaped for a moment past the jibs and into our line of vision.
Louis gave a spoke and temporized.
"They'd never iv made the land, sir, I'm thinkin'."
"Think not?"
I queried.
"No, sir.
Did you feel that?"
(A puff had caught the schooner, and he was forced to put the wheel up rapidly to keep her out of the wind.)
"'Tis no egg-shell'll float on this sea an hour come, an' it's a stroke iv luck for them we're here to pick 'em up."
Wolf Larsen strode aft from amidships, where he had been talking with the rescued men.
The cat-like springiness in his tread was a little more pronounced than usual, and his eyes were bright and snappy.
"Three oilers and a fourth engineer," was his greeting.
"But we'll make sailors out of them, or boat-pullers at any rate.
Now, what of the lady?"
I know not why, but I was aware of a twinge or pang like the cut of a knife when he mentioned her.
I thought it a certain silly fastidiousness on my part, but it persisted in spite of me, and I merely shrugged my shoulders in answer.
Wolf Larsen pursed his lips in a long, quizzical whistle.
"What's her name, then?"
he demanded.
"I don't know," I replied.
"She is asleep.
She was very tired.
In fact, I am waiting to hear the news from you.
What vessel was it?"
"Mail steamer," he answered shortly.
"The City of Tokio, from 'Frisco, bound for Yokohama.
Disabled in that typhoon.
Old tub.
Opened up top and bottom like a sieve.
They were adrift four days.
And you don't know who or what she is, eh?
- maid, wife, or widow?
Well, well."
He shook his head in a bantering way, and regarded me with laughing eyes.
"Are you - " I began.
It was on the verge of my tongue to ask if he were going to take the castaways into Yokohama.
"Am I what?"
he asked.
"What do you intend doing with Leach and Johnson?"
He shook his head.
"Really, Hump, I don't know.
You see, with these additions I've about all the crew I want."
"And they've about all the escaping they want," I said.
"Why not give them a change of treatment?
Take them aboard, and deal gently with them.
Whatever they have done they have been hounded into doing."
"By me?"
"By you," I answered steadily.
"And I give you warning, Wolf Larsen, that I may forget love of my own life in the desire to kill you if you go too far in maltreating those poor wretches."
"Bravo!"
he cried.
"You do me proud, Hump!
You've found your legs with a vengeance.
You're quite an individual.
You were unfortunate in having your life cast in easy places, but you're developing, and I like you the better for it."
His voice and expression changed.
His face was serious.
"Do you believe in promises?"
he asked.
"Are they sacred things?"
"Of course," I answered.
"Then here's a compact," he went on, consummate actor.
"If I promise not to lay my hands upon Leach will you promise, in turn, not to attempt to kill me?"
"Oh, not that I'm afraid of you, not that I'm afraid of you," he hastened to add.
I could hardly believe my ears.
What was coming over the man?
"Is it a go?"
he asked impatiently.
"A go," I answered.
His hand went out to mine, and as I shook it heartily I could have sworn I saw the mocking devil shine up for a moment in his eyes.
We strolled across the poop to the lee side.
The boat was close at hand now, and in desperate plight.
Johnson was steering, Leach bailing.
We overhauled them about two feet to their one.
Wolf Larsen motioned Louis to keep off slightly, and we dashed abreast of the boat, not a score of feet to windward.
The Ghost blanketed it.
The spritsail flapped emptily and the boat righted to an even keel, causing the two men swiftly to change position.
The boat lost headway, and, as we lifted on a huge surge, toppled and fell into the trough.
It was at this moment that Leach and Johnson looked up into the faces of their shipmates, who lined the rail amidships.
There was no greeting.
They were as dead men in their comrades' eyes, and between them was the gulf that parts the living and the dead.
The next instant they were opposite the poop, where stood Wolf Larsen and I.
We were falling in the trough, they were rising on the surge.
Johnson looked at me, and I could see that his face was worn and haggard.
I waved my hand to him, and he answered the greeting, but with a wave that was hopeless and despairing.
It was as if he were saying farewell.
I did not see into the eyes of Leach, for he was looking at Wolf Larsen, the old and implacable snarl of hatred strong as ever on his face.
Then they were gone astern.
The spritsail filled with the wind, suddenly, careening the frail open craft till it seemed it would surely capsize.
A whitecap foamed above it and broke across in a snow-white smother.
Then the boat emerged, half swamped, Leach flinging the water out and Johnson clinging to the steering-oar, his face white and anxious.
Wolf Larsen barked a short laugh in my ear and strode away to the weather side of the poop.
I expected him to give orders for the Ghost to heave to, but she kept on her course and he made no sign.
Louis stood imperturbably at the wheel, but I noticed the grouped sailors forward turning troubled faces in our direction.
Still the Ghost tore along, till the boat dwindled to a speck, when Wolf Larsen's voice rang out in command and he went about on the starboard tack.
Back we held, two miles and more to windward of the struggling cockle-shell, when the flying jib was run down and the schooner hove to.
The sealing boats are not made for windward work.
Their hope lies in keeping a weather position so that they may run before the wind for the schooner when it breezes up.
But in all that wild waste there was no refuge for Leach and Johnson save on the Ghost, and they resolutely began the windward beat.
It was slow work in the heavy sea that was running.
At any moment they were liable to be overwhelmed by the hissing combers.
Time and again and countless times we watched the boat luff into the big whitecaps, lose headway, and be flung back like a cork.
Johnson was a splendid seaman, and he knew as much about small boats as he did about ships.
At the end of an hour and a half he was nearly alongside, standing past our stern on the last leg out, aiming to fetch us on the next leg back.
"So you've changed your mind?"
I heard Wolf Larsen mutter, half to himself, half to them as though they could hear.
"You want to come aboard, eh?
Well, then, just keep a-coming."
"Hard up with that helm!"
he commanded Oofty-Oofty, the Kanaka, who had in the meantime relieved Louis at the wheel.
Command followed command.
As the schooner paid off, the fore- and main-sheets were slacked away for fair wind.
And before the wind we were, and leaping, when Johnson, easing his sheet at imminent peril, cut across our wake a hundred feet away.
Again Wolf Larsen laughed, at the same time beckoning them with his arm to follow.
It was evidently his intention to play with them, - a lesson, I took it, in lieu of a beating, though a dangerous lesson, for the frail craft stood in momentary danger of being overwhelmed.
Johnson squared away promptly and ran after us.
There was nothing else for him to do.
Death stalked everywhere, and it was only a matter of time when some one of those many huge seas would fall upon the boat, roll over it, and pass on.
"'Tis the fear iv death at the hearts iv them," Louis muttered in my ear, as I passed forward to see to taking in the flying jib and staysail.
"Oh, he'll heave to in a little while and pick them up," I answered cheerfully.
"He's bent upon giving them a lesson, that's all."
Louis looked at me shrewdly.
"Think so?"
he asked.
"Surely," I answered.
"Don't you?"
"I think nothing but iv my own skin, these days," was his answer.
"An' 'tis with wonder I'm filled as to the workin' out iv things.
A pretty mess that 'Frisco whisky got me into, an' a prettier mess that woman's got you into aft there.
Ah, it's myself that knows ye for a blitherin' fool."
"What do you mean?"
I demanded; for, having sped his shaft, he was turning away.
"What do I mean?"
he cried.
"And it's you that asks me!
'Tis not what I mean, but what the Wolf 'll mean.
The Wolf, I said, the Wolf!"
"If trouble comes, will you stand by?"
I asked impulsively, for he had voiced my own fear.
"Stand by?
'Tis old fat Louis I stand by, an' trouble enough it'll be.
We're at the beginnin' iv things, I'm tellin' ye, the bare beginnin' iv things."
"I had not thought you so great a coward," I sneered.
He favoured me with a contemptuous stare.
"If I raised never a hand for that poor fool," - pointing astern to the tiny sail, - "d'ye think I'm hungerin' for a broken head for a woman I never laid me eyes upon before this day?"
I turned scornfully away and went aft.
"Better get in those topsails, Mr. Van Weyden," Wolf Larsen said, as I came on the poop.
I felt relief, at least as far as the two men were concerned.
It was clear he did not wish to run too far away from them.
I picked up hope at the thought and put the order swiftly into execution.
I had scarcely opened my mouth to issue the necessary commands, when eager men were springing to halyards and downhauls, and others were racing aloft.
This eagerness on their part was noted by Wolf Larsen with a grim smile.
Still we increased our lead, and when the boat had dropped astern several miles we hove to and waited.
All eyes watched it coming, even Wolf Larsen's; but he was the only unperturbed man aboard.
Louis, gazing fixedly, betrayed a trouble in his face he was not quite able to hide.
The boat drew closer and closer, hurling along through the seething green like a thing alive, lifting and sending and uptossing across the huge-backed breakers, or disappearing behind them only to rush into sight again and shoot skyward.
It seemed impossible that it could continue to live, yet with each dizzying sweep it did achieve the impossible.
A rain-squall drove past, and out of the flying wet the boat emerged, almost upon us.
"Hard up, there!"
Wolf Larsen shouted, himself springing to the wheel and whirling it over.
Again the Ghost sprang away and raced before the wind, and for two hours Johnson and Leach pursued us.
We hove to and ran away, hove to and ran away, and ever astern the struggling patch of sail tossed skyward and fell into the rushing valleys.
It was a quarter of a mile away when a thick squall of rain veiled it from view.
It never emerged.
The wind blew the air clear again, but no patch of sail broke the troubled surface.
I thought I saw, for an instant, the boat's bottom show black in a breaking crest.
At the best, that was all.
For Johnson and Leach the travail of existence had ceased.
The men remained grouped amidships.
No one had gone below, and no one was speaking.
Nor were any looks being exchanged.
Each man seemed stunned - deeply contemplative, as it were, and, not quite sure, trying to realize just what had taken place.
Wolf Larsen gave them little time for thought.
He at once put the Ghost upon her course - a course which meant the seal herd and not Yokohama harbour.
But the men were no longer eager as they pulled and hauled, and I heard curses amongst them, which left their lips smothered and as heavy and lifeless as were they.
Not so was it with the hunters.
Smoke the irrepressible related a story, and they descended into the steerage, bellowing with laughter.
As I passed to leeward of the galley on my way aft I was approached by the engineer we had rescued.
His face was white, his lips were trembling.
"Good God!
sir, what kind of a craft is this?"
he cried.
"You have eyes, you have seen," I answered, almost brutally, what of the pain and fear at my own heart.
"Your promise?"
I said to Wolf Larsen.
"I was not thinking of taking them aboard when I made that promise," he answered.
"And anyway, you'll agree I've not laid my hands upon them."
"Far from it, far from it," he laughed a moment later.
I made no reply.
I was incapable of speaking, my mind was too confused.
I must have time to think, I knew.
This woman, sleeping even now in the spare cabin, was a responsibility, which I must consider, and the only rational thought that flickered through my mind was that I must do nothing hastily if I were to be any help to her at all.
The remainder of the day passed uneventfully.
The young slip of a gale, having wetted our gills, proceeded to moderate.
The fourth engineer and the three oilers, after a warm interview with Wolf Larsen, were furnished with outfits from the slop-chests, assigned places under the hunters in the various boats and watches on the vessel, and bundled forward into the forecastle.
They went protestingly, but their voices were not loud.
They were awed by what they had already seen of Wolf Larsen's character, while the tale of woe they speedily heard in the forecastle took the last bit of rebellion out of them.
Miss Brewster - we had learned her name from the engineer - slept on and on.
At supper I requested the hunters to lower their voices, so she was not disturbed; and it was not till next morning that she made her appearance.
It had been my intention to have her meals served apart, but Wolf Larsen put down his foot.
Who was she that she should be too good for cabin table and cabin society?
had been his demand.
But her coming to the table had something amusing in it.
The hunters fell silent as clams.
Jock Horner and Smoke alone were unabashed, stealing stealthy glances at her now and again, and even taking part in the conversation.
The other four men glued their eyes on their plates and chewed steadily and with thoughtful precision, their ears moving and wobbling, in time with their jaws, like the ears of so many animals.
Wolf Larsen had little to say at first, doing no more than reply when he was addressed.
Not that he was abashed.
Far from it.
This woman was a new type to him, a different breed from any he had ever known, and he was curious.
He studied her, his eyes rarely leaving her face unless to follow the movements of her hands or shoulders.
I studied her myself, and though it was I who maintained the conversation, I know that I was a bit shy, not quite self-possessed.
His was the perfect poise, the supreme confidence in self, which nothing could shake; and he was no more timid of a woman than he was of storm and battle.
"And when shall we arrive at Yokohama?"
she asked, turning to him and looking him squarely in the eyes.
There it was, the question flat.
The jaws stopped working, the ears ceased wobbling, and though eyes remained glued on plates, each man listened greedily for the answer.
"In four months, possibly three if the season closes early," Wolf Larsen said.
She caught her breath and stammered, "I - I thought - I was given to understand that Yokohama was only a day's sail away.
It - " Here she paused and looked about the table at the circle of unsympathetic faces staring hard at the plates.
"It is not right," she concluded.
"That is a question you must settle with Mr. Van Weyden there," he replied, nodding to me with a mischievous twinkle.
"Mr. Van Weyden is what you may call an authority on such things as rights.
Now I, who am only a sailor, would look upon the situation somewhat differently.
It may possibly be your misfortune that you have to remain with us, but it is certainly our good fortune."
He regarded her smilingly.
Her eyes fell before his gaze, but she lifted them again, and defiantly, to mine.
I read the unspoken question there: was it right?
But I had decided that the part I was to play must be a neutral one, so I did not answer.
"What do you think?"
she demanded.
"That it is unfortunate, especially if you have any engagements falling due in the course of the next several months.
But, since you say that you were voyaging to Japan for your health, I can assure you that it will improve no better anywhere than aboard the Ghost."
I saw her eyes flash with indignation, and this time it was I who dropped mine, while I felt my face flushing under her gaze.
It was cowardly, but what else could I do?
"Mr. Van Weyden speaks with the voice of authority," Wolf Larsen laughed.
I nodded my head, and she, having recovered herself, waited expectantly.
"Not that he is much to speak of now," Wolf Larsen went on, "but he has improved wonderfully.
You should have seen him when he came on board.
A more scrawny, pitiful specimen of humanity one could hardly conceive.
Isn't that so, Kerfoot?"
Kerfoot, thus directly addressed, was startled into dropping his knife on the floor, though he managed to grunt affirmation.
"Developed himself by peeling potatoes and washing dishes.
Eh, Kerfoot?"
Again that worthy grunted.
"Look at him now.
True, he is not what you would term muscular, but still he has muscles, which is more than he had when he came aboard.
Also, he has legs to stand on.
You would not think so to look at him, but he was quite unable to stand alone at first."
The hunters were snickering, but she looked at me with a sympathy in her eyes which more than compensated for Wolf Larsen's nastiness.
In truth, it had been so long since I had received sympathy that I was softened, and I became then, and gladly, her willing slave.
But I was angry with Wolf Larsen.
He was challenging my manhood with his slurs, challenging the very legs he claimed to be instrumental in getting for me.
"I may have learned to stand on my own legs," I retorted.
"But I have yet to stamp upon others with them."
He looked at me insolently.
"Your education is only half completed, then," he said dryly, and turned to her.
"We are very hospitable upon the Ghost.
Mr. Van Weyden has discovered that.
We do everything to make our guests feel at home, eh, Mr. Van Weyden?"
"Even to the peeling of potatoes and the washing of dishes," I answered, "to say nothing to wringing their necks out of very fellowship."
"I beg of you not to receive false impressions of us from Mr. Van Weyden," he interposed with mock anxiety.
"You will observe, Miss Brewster, that he carries a dirk in his belt, a - ahem - a most unusual thing for a ship's officer to do.
While really very estimable, Mr. Van Weyden is sometimes - how shall I say?
- er - quarrelsome, and harsh measures are necessary.
He is quite reasonable and fair in his calm moments, and as he is calm now he will not deny that only yesterday he threatened my life."
I was well-nigh choking, and my eyes were certainly fiery.
He drew attention to me.
"Look at him now.
He can scarcely control himself in your presence.
He is not accustomed to the presence of ladies anyway.
I shall have to arm myself before I dare go on deck with him."
He shook his head sadly, murmuring, "Too bad, too bad," while the hunters burst into guffaws of laughter.
The deep-sea voices of these men, rumbling and bellowing in the confined space, produced a wild effect.
The whole setting was wild, and for the first time, regarding this strange woman and realizing how incongruous she was in it, I was aware of how much a part of it I was myself.
I knew these men and their mental processes, was one of them myself, living the seal-hunting life, eating the seal-hunting fare, thinking, largely, the seal-hunting thoughts.
There was for me no strangeness to it, to the rough clothes, the coarse faces, the wild laughter, and the lurching cabin walls and swaying sea-lamps.
As I buttered a piece of bread my eyes chanced to rest upon my hand.
The knuckles were skinned and inflamed clear across, the fingers swollen, the nails rimmed with black.
I felt the mattress-like growth of beard on my neck, knew that the sleeve of my coat was ripped, that a button was missing from the throat of the blue shirt I wore.
The dirk mentioned by Wolf Larsen rested in its sheath on my hip.
It was very natural that it should be there, - how natural I had not imagined until now, when I looked upon it with her eyes and knew how strange it and all that went with it must appear to her.
But she divined the mockery in Wolf Larsen's words, and again favoured me with a sympathetic glance.
But there was a look of bewilderment also in her eyes.
That it was mockery made the situation more puzzling to her.
"I may be taken off by some passing vessel, perhaps," she suggested.
"There will be no passing vessels, except other sealing-schooners," Wolf Larsen made answer.
"I have no clothes, nothing," she objected.
"You hardly realize, sir, that I am not a man, or that I am unaccustomed to the vagrant, careless life which you and your men seem to lead."
"The sooner you get accustomed to it, the better," he said.
"I'll furnish you with cloth, needles, and thread," he added.
"I hope it will not be too dreadful a hardship for you to make yourself a dress or two."
She made a wry pucker with her mouth, as though to advertise her ignorance of dressmaking.
That she was frightened and bewildered, and that she was bravely striving to hide it, was quite plain to me.
"I suppose you're like Mr. Van Weyden there, accustomed to having things done for you.
Well, I think doing a few things for yourself will hardly dislocate any joints.
By the way, what do you do for a living?"
She regarded him with amazement unconcealed.
"I mean no offence, believe me.
People eat, therefore they must procure the wherewithal.
These men here shoot seals in order to live; for the same reason I sail this schooner; and Mr. Van Weyden, for the present at any rate, earns his salty grub by assisting me.
Now what do you do?"
She shrugged her shoulders.
"Do you feed yourself?
Or does some one else feed you?"
"I'm afraid some one else has fed me most of my life," she laughed, trying bravely to enter into the spirit of his quizzing, though I could see a terror dawning and growing in her eyes as she watched Wolf Larsen.
"And I suppose some one else makes your bed for you?"
"I have made beds," she replied.
"Very often?"
She shook her head with mock ruefulness.
"Do you know what they do to poor men in the States, who, like you, do not work for their living?"
"I am very ignorant," she pleaded.
"What do they do to the poor men who are like me?"
"They send them to jail.
The crime of not earning a living, in their case, is called vagrancy.
If I were Mr. Van Weyden, who harps eternally on questions of right and wrong, I'd ask, by what right do you live when you do nothing to deserve living?"
"But as you are not Mr. Van Weyden, I don't have to answer, do I?"
She beamed upon him through her terror-filled eyes, and the pathos of it cut me to the heart.
I must in some way break in and lead the conversation into other channels.
"Have you ever earned a dollar by your own labour?"
he demanded, certain of her answer, a triumphant vindictiveness in his voice.
"Yes, I have," she answered slowly, and I could have laughed aloud at his crestfallen visage.
"I remember my father giving me a dollar once, when I was a little girl, for remaining absolutely quiet for five minutes."
He smiled indulgently.
"But that was long ago," she continued.
"And you would scarcely demand a little girl of nine to earn her own living."
"At present, however," she said, after another slight pause, "I earn about eighteen hundred dollars a year."
With one accord, all eyes left the plates and settled on her.
A woman who earned eighteen hundred dollars a year was worth looking at.
Wolf Larsen was undisguised in his admiration.
"Salary, or piece-work?"
he asked.
"Piece-work," she answered promptly.
"Eighteen hundred," he calculated.
"That's a hundred and fifty dollars a month.
Well, Miss Brewster, there is nothing small about the Ghost.
Consider yourself on salary during the time you remain with us."
She made no acknowledgment.
She was too unused as yet to the whims of the man to accept them with equanimity.
"I forgot to inquire," he went on suavely, "as to the nature of your occupation.
What commodities do you turn out?
What tools and materials do you require?"
"Paper and ink," she laughed.
"And, oh!
also a typewriter."
"You are Maud Brewster," I said slowly and with certainty, almost as though I were charging her with a crime.
Her eyes lifted curiously to mine.
"How do you know?"
"Aren't you?"
I demanded.
She acknowledged her identity with a nod.
It was Wolf Larsen's turn to be puzzled.
The name and its magic signified nothing to him.
I was proud that it did mean something to me, and for the first time in a weary while I was convincingly conscious of a superiority over him.
"I remember writing a review of a thin little volume - " I had begun carelessly, when she interrupted me.
"You!"
she cried.
"You are - "
She was now staring at me in wide-eyed wonder.
I nodded my identity, in turn.
"Humphrey Van Weyden," she concluded; then added with a sigh of relief, and unaware that she had glanced that relief at Wolf Larsen, "I am so glad."
"I remember the review," she went on hastily, becoming aware of the awkwardness of her remark; "that too, too flattering review."
"Not at all," I denied valiantly.
"You impeach my sober judgment and make my canons of little worth.
Besides, all my brother critics were with me.
Didn't Lang include your 'Kiss Endured' among the four supreme sonnets by women in the English language?"
"But you called me the American Mrs.
Meynell!"
"Was it not true?"
I demanded.
"No, not that," she answered.
"I was hurt."
"We can measure the unknown only by the known," I replied, in my finest academic manner.
"As a critic I was compelled to place you.
You have now become a yardstick yourself.
Seven of your thin little volumes are on my shelves; and there are two thicker volumes, the essays, which, you will pardon my saying, and I know not which is flattered more, fully equal your verse.
The time is not far distant when some unknown will arise in England and the critics will name her the English Maud Brewster."
"You are very kind, I am sure," she murmured; and the very conventionality of her tones and words, with the host of associations it aroused of the old life on the other side of the world, gave me a quick thrill - rich with remembrance but stinging sharp with home-sickness.
"And you are Maud Brewster," I said solemnly, gazing across at her.
"And you are Humphrey Van Weyden," she said, gazing back at me with equal solemnity and awe.
"How unusual!
I don't understand.
We surely are not to expect some wildly romantic sea-story from your sober pen."
"No, I am not gathering material, I assure you," was my answer.
"I have neither aptitude nor inclination for fiction."
"Tell me, why have you always buried yourself in California?"
she next asked.
"It has not been kind of you.
We of the East have seen to very little of you - too little, indeed, of the Dean of American Letters, the Second."
I bowed to, and disclaimed, the compliment.
"I nearly met you, once, in Philadelphia, some Browning affair or other - you were to lecture, you know.
My train was four hours late."
And then we quite forgot where we were, leaving Wolf Larsen stranded and silent in the midst of our flood of gossip.
The hunters left the table and went on deck, and still we talked.
Wolf Larsen alone remained.
Suddenly I became aware of him, leaning back from the table and listening curiously to our alien speech of a world he did not know.
I broke short off in the middle of a sentence.
The present, with all its perils and anxieties, rushed upon me with stunning force.
It smote Miss Brewster likewise, a vague and nameless terror rushing into her eyes as she regarded Wolf Larsen.
He rose to his feet and laughed awkwardly.
The sound of it was metallic.
"Oh, don't mind me," he said, with a self-depreciatory wave of his hand.
"I don't count.
Go on, go on, I pray you."
But the gates of speech were closed, and we, too, rose from the table and laughed awkwardly.
The chagrin Wolf Larsen felt from being ignored by Maud Brewster and me in the conversation at table had to express itself in some fashion, and it fell to Thomas Mugridge to be the victim.
He had not mended his ways nor his shirt, though the latter he contended he had changed.
The garment itself did not bear out the assertion, nor did the accumulations of grease on stove and pot and pan attest a general cleanliness.
"I've given you warning, Cooky," Wolf Larsen said, "and now you've got to take your medicine."
Mugridge's face turned white under its sooty veneer, and when Wolf Larsen called for a rope and a couple of men, the miserable Cockney fled wildly out of the galley and dodged and ducked about the deck with the grinning crew in pursuit.
Few things could have been more to their liking than to give him a tow over the side, for to the forecastle he had sent messes and concoctions of the vilest order.
Conditions favoured the undertaking.
The Ghost was slipping through the water at no more than three miles an hour, and the sea was fairly calm.
But Mugridge had little stomach for a dip in it.
Possibly he had seen men towed before.
Besides, the water was frightfully cold, and his was anything but a rugged constitution.
As usual, the watches below and the hunters turned out for what promised sport.
Mugridge seemed to be in rabid fear of the water, and he exhibited a nimbleness and speed we did not dream he possessed.
Cornered in the right-angle of the poop and galley, he sprang like a cat to the top of the cabin and ran aft.
But his pursuers forestalling him, he doubled back across the cabin, passed over the galley, and gained the deck by means of the steerage-scuttle.
Straight forward he raced, the boat-puller Harrison at his heels and gaining on him.
But Mugridge, leaping suddenly, caught the jib-boom-lift.
It happened in an instant.
Holding his weight by his arms, and in mid-air doubling his body at the hips, he let fly with both feet.
The oncoming Harrison caught the kick squarely in the pit of the stomach, groaned involuntarily, and doubled up and sank backward to the deck.
Hand-clapping and roars of laughter from the hunters greeted the exploit, while Mugridge, eluding half of his pursuers at the foremast, ran aft and through the remainder like a runner on the football field.
Straight aft he held, to the poop and along the poop to the stern.
So great was his speed that as he curved past the corner of the cabin he slipped and fell.
Nilson was standing at the wheel, and the Cockney's hurtling body struck his legs.
Both went down together, but Mugridge alone arose.
By some freak of pressures, his frail body had snapped the strong man's leg like a pipe-stem.
Parsons took the wheel, and the pursuit continued.
Round and round the decks they went, Mugridge sick with fear, the sailors hallooing and shouting directions to one another, and the hunters bellowing encouragement and laughter.
Mugridge went down on the fore-hatch under three men; but he emerged from the mass like an eel, bleeding at the mouth, the offending shirt ripped into tatters, and sprang for the main-rigging.
Up he went, clear up, beyond the ratlines, to the very masthead.
Half-a-dozen sailors swarmed to the crosstrees after him, where they clustered and waited while two of their number, Oofty-Oofty and Black (who was Latimer's boat-steerer), continued up the thin steel stays, lifting their bodies higher and higher by means of their arms.
It was a perilous undertaking, for, at a height of over a hundred feet from the deck, holding on by their hands, they were not in the best of positions to protect themselves from Mugridge's feet.
And Mugridge kicked savagely, till the Kanaka, hanging on with one hand, seized the Cockney's foot with the other.
Black duplicated the performance a moment later with the other foot.
Then the three writhed together in a swaying tangle, struggling, sliding, and falling into the arms of their mates on the crosstrees.
The aërial battle was over, and Thomas Mugridge, whining and gibbering, his mouth flecked with bloody foam, was brought down to deck.
Wolf Larsen rove a bowline in a piece of rope and slipped it under his shoulders.
Then he was carried aft and flung into the sea.
Forty, - fifty, - sixty feet of line ran out, when Wolf Larsen cried "Belay!"
Oofty-Oofty took a turn on a bitt, the rope tautened, and the Ghost, lunging onward, jerked the cook to the surface.
It was a pitiful spectacle.
Though he could not drown, and was nine-lived in addition, he was suffering all the agonies of half-drowning.
The Ghost was going very slowly, and when her stern lifted on a wave and she slipped forward she pulled the wretch to the surface and gave him a moment in which to breathe; but between each lift the stern fell, and while the bow lazily climbed the next wave the line slacked and he sank beneath.
I had forgotten the existence of Maud Brewster, and I remembered her with a start as she stepped lightly beside me.
It was her first time on deck since she had come aboard.
A dead silence greeted her appearance.
"What is the cause of the merriment?"
she asked.
"Ask Captain Larsen," I answered composedly and coldly, though inwardly my blood was boiling at the thought that she should be witness to such brutality.
She took my advice and was turning to put it into execution, when her eyes lighted on Oofty-Oofty, immediately before her, his body instinct with alertness and grace as he held the turn of the rope.
"Are you fishing?"
she asked him.
He made no reply.
His eyes, fixed intently on the sea astern, suddenly flashed.
"Shark ho, sir!"
he cried.
"Heave in!
Lively!
All hands tail on!"
Wolf Larsen shouted, springing himself to the rope in advance of the quickest.
Mugridge had heard the Kanaka's warning cry and was screaming madly.
I could see a black fin cutting the water and making for him with greater swiftness than he was being pulled aboard.
It was an even toss whether the shark or we would get him, and it was a matter of moments.
When Mugridge was directly beneath us, the stern descended the slope of a passing wave, thus giving the advantage to the shark.
The fin disappeared.
The belly flashed white in swift upward rush.
Almost equally swift, but not quite, was Wolf Larsen.
He threw his strength into one tremendous jerk.
The Cockney's body left the water; so did part of the shark's.
He drew up his legs, and the man-eater seemed no more than barely to touch one foot, sinking back into the water with a splash.
But at the moment of contact Thomas Mugridge cried out.
Then he came in like a fresh-caught fish on a line, clearing the rail generously and striking the deck in a heap, on hands and knees, and rolling over.
But a fountain of blood was gushing forth.
The right foot was missing, amputated neatly at the ankle.
I looked instantly to Maud Brewster.
Her face was white, her eyes dilated with horror.
She was gazing, not at Thomas Mugridge, but at Wolf Larsen.
And he was aware of it, for he said, with one of his short laughs:
"Man-play, Miss Brewster.
Somewhat rougher, I warrant, than what you have been used to, but still-man-play.
The shark was not in the reckoning.
It - "
But at this juncture, Mugridge, who had lifted his head and ascertained the extent of his loss, floundered over on the deck and buried his teeth in Wolf Larsen's leg.
Wolf Larsen stooped, coolly, to the Cockney, and pressed with thumb and finger at the rear of the jaws and below the ears.
The jaws opened with reluctance, and Wolf Larsen stepped free.
"As I was saying," he went on, as though nothing unwonted had happened, "the shark was not in the reckoning.
It was - ahem - shall we say Providence?"
She gave no sign that she had heard, though the expression of her eyes changed to one of inexpressible loathing as she started to turn away.
She no more than started, for she swayed and tottered, and reached her hand weakly out to mine.
I caught her in time to save her from falling, and helped her to a seat on the cabin.
I thought she might faint outright, but she controlled herself.
"Will you get a tourniquet, Mr. Van Weyden," Wolf Larsen called to me.
I hesitated.
Her lips moved, and though they formed no words, she commanded me with her eyes, plainly as speech, to go to the help of the unfortunate man.
"Please," she managed to whisper, and I could but obey.
By now I had developed such skill at surgery that Wolf Larsen, with a few words of advice, left me to my task with a couple of sailors for assistants.
For his task he elected a vengeance on the shark.
A heavy swivel-hook, baited with fat salt-pork, was dropped overside; and by the time I had compressed the severed veins and arteries, the sailors were singing and heaving in the offending monster.
I did not see it myself, but my assistants, first one and then the other, deserted me for a few moments to run amidships and look at what was going on.
The shark, a sixteen-footer, was hoisted up against the main-rigging.
Its jaws were pried apart to their greatest extension, and a stout stake, sharpened at both ends, was so inserted that when the pries were removed the spread jaws were fixed upon it.
This accomplished, the hook was cut out.
The shark dropped back into the sea, helpless, yet with its full strength, doomed - to lingering starvation - a living death less meet for it than for the man who devised the punishment.
I knew what it was as she came toward me.
For ten minutes I had watched her talking earnestly with the engineer, and now, with a sign for silence, I drew her out of earshot of the helmsman.
Her face was white and set; her large eyes, larger than usual what of the purpose in them, looked penetratingly into mine.
I felt rather timid and apprehensive, for she had come to search Humphrey Van Weyden's soul, and Humphrey Van Weyden had nothing of which to be particularly proud since his advent on the Ghost.
We walked to the break of the poop, where she turned and faced me.
I glanced around to see that no one was within hearing distance.
"What is it?"
I asked gently; but the expression of determination on her face did not relax.
"I can readily understand," she began, "that this morning's affair was largely an accident; but I have been talking with Mr. Haskins.
He tells me that the day we were rescued, even while I was in the cabin, two men were drowned, deliberately drowned - murdered."
There was a query in her voice, and she faced me accusingly, as though I were guilty of the deed, or at least a party to it.
"The information is quite correct," I answered.
"The two men were murdered."
"And you permitted it!"
she cried.
"I was unable to prevent it, is a better way of phrasing it," I replied, still gently.
"But you tried to prevent it?"
There was an emphasis on the "tried," and a pleading little note in her voice.
"Oh, but you didn't," she hurried on, divining my answer.
"But why didn't you?"
I shrugged my shoulders.
"You must remember, Miss Brewster, that you are a new inhabitant of this little world, and that you do not yet understand the laws which operate within it.
You bring with you certain fine conceptions of humanity, manhood, conduct, and such things; but here you will find them misconceptions.
I have found it so," I added, with an involuntary sigh.
She shook her head incredulously.
"What would you advise, then?"
I asked.
"That I should take a knife, or a gun, or an axe, and kill this man?"
She half started back.
"No, not that!"
"Then what should I do?
Kill myself?"
"You speak in purely materialistic terms," she objected.
"There is such a thing as moral courage, and moral courage is never without effect."
"Ah," I smiled, "you advise me to kill neither him nor myself, but to let him kill me."
I held up my hand as she was about to speak.
"For moral courage is a worthless asset on this little floating world.
Leach, one of the men who were murdered, had moral courage to an unusual degree.
So had the other man, Johnson.
Not only did it not stand them in good stead, but it destroyed them.
And so with me if I should exercise what little moral courage I may possess.
"You must understand, Miss Brewster, and understand clearly, that this man is a monster.
He is without conscience.
Nothing is sacred to him, nothing is too terrible for him to do.
It was due to his whim that I was detained aboard in the first place.
It is due to his whim that I am still alive.
I do nothing, can do nothing, because I am a slave to this monster, as you are now a slave to him; because I desire to live, as you will desire to live; because I cannot fight and overcome him, just as you will not be able to fight and overcome him."
She waited for me to go on.
"What remains?
Mine is the role of the weak.
I remain silent and suffer ignominy, as you will remain silent and suffer ignominy.
And it is well.
It is the best we can do if we wish to live.
The battle is not always to the strong.
We have not the strength with which to fight this man; we must dissimulate, and win, if win we can, by craft.
If you will be advised by me, this is what you will do.
I know my position is perilous, and I may say frankly that yours is even more perilous.
We must stand together, without appearing to do so, in secret alliance.
I shall not be able to side with you openly, and, no matter what indignities may be put upon me, you are to remain likewise silent.
We must provoke no scenes with this man, nor cross his will.
And we must keep smiling faces and be friendly with him no matter how repulsive it may be."
She brushed her hand across her forehead in a puzzled way, saying, "Still I do not understand."
"You must do as I say," I interrupted authoritatively, for I saw Wolf Larsen's gaze wandering toward us from where he paced up and down with Latimer amidships.
"Do as I say, and ere long you will find I am right."
"What shall I do, then?"
she asked, detecting the anxious glance I had shot at the object of our conversation, and impressed, I flatter myself, with the earnestness of my manner.
"Dispense with all the moral courage you can," I said briskly.
"Don't arouse this man's animosity.
Be quite friendly with him, talk with him, discuss literature and art with him - he is fond of such things.
You will find him an interested listener and no fool.
And for your own sake try to avoid witnessing, as much as you can, the brutalities of the ship.
It will make it easier for you to act your part."
"I am to lie," she said in steady, rebellious tones, "by speech and action to lie."
Wolf Larsen had separated from Latimer and was coming toward us.
I was desperate.
"Please, please understand me," I said hurriedly, lowering my voice.
"All your experience of men and things is worthless here.
You must begin over again.
I know, - I can see it - you have, among other ways, been used to managing people with your eyes, letting your moral courage speak out through them, as it were.
You have already managed me with your eyes, commanded me with them.
But don't try it on Wolf Larsen.
You could as easily control a lion, while he would make a mock of you.
He would - I have always been proud of the fact that I discovered him," I said, turning the conversation as Wolf Larsen stepped on the poop and joined us.
"The editors were afraid of him and the publishers would have none of him.
But I knew, and his genius and my judgment were vindicated when he made that magnificent hit with his 'Forge.'"
"And it was a newspaper poem," she said glibly.
"It did happen to see the light in a newspaper," I replied, "but not because the magazine editors had been denied a glimpse at it."
"We were talking of Harris," I said to Wolf Larsen.
"Oh, yes," he acknowledged.
"I remember the 'Forge.'
Filled with pretty sentiments and an almighty faith in human illusions.
By the way, Mr. Van Weyden, you'd better look in on Cooky.
He's complaining and restless."
Thus was I bluntly dismissed from the poop, only to find Mugridge sleeping soundly from the morphine I had given him.
I made no haste to return on deck, and when I did I was gratified to see Miss Brewster in animated conversation with Wolf Larsen.
As I say, the sight gratified me.
She was following my advice.
And yet I was conscious of a slight shock or hurt in that she was able to do the thing I had begged her to do and which she had notably disliked.
Brave winds, blowing fair, swiftly drove the Ghost northward into the seal herd.
We encountered it well up to the forty-fourth parallel, in a raw and stormy sea across which the wind harried the fog-banks in eternal flight.
For days at a time we could never see the sun nor take an observation; then the wind would sweep the face of the ocean clean, the waves would ripple and flash, and we would learn where we were.
A day of clear weather might follow, or three days or four, and then the fog would settle down upon us, seemingly thicker than ever.
The hunting was perilous; yet the boats, lowered day after day, were swallowed up in the grey obscurity, and were seen no more till nightfall, and often not till long after, when they would creep in like sea-wraiths, one by one, out of the grey.
Wainwright - the hunter whom Wolf Larsen had stolen with boat and men - took advantage of the veiled sea and escaped.
He disappeared one morning in the encircling fog with his two men, and we never saw them again, though it was not many days when we learned that they had passed from schooner to schooner until they finally regained their own.
This was the thing I had set my mind upon doing, but the opportunity never offered.
It was not in the mate's province to go out in the boats, and though I manoeuvred cunningly for it, Wolf Larsen never granted me the privilege.
Had he done so, I should have managed somehow to carry Miss Brewster away with me.
As it was, the situation was approaching a stage which I was afraid to consider.
I involuntarily shunned the thought of it, and yet the thought continually arose in my mind like a haunting spectre.
I had read sea-romances in my time, wherein figured, as a matter of course, the lone woman in the midst of a shipload of men; but I learned, now, that I had never comprehended the deeper significance of such a situation - the thing the writers harped upon and exploited so thoroughly.
And here it was, now, and I was face to face with it.
That it should be as vital as possible, it required no more than that the woman should be Maud Brewster, who now charmed me in person as she had long charmed me through her work.
No one more out of environment could be imagined.
She was a delicate, ethereal creature, swaying and willowy, light and graceful of movement.
It never seemed to me that she walked, or, at least, walked after the ordinary manner of mortals.
Hers was an extreme lithesomeness, and she moved with a certain indefinable airiness, approaching one as down might float or as a bird on noiseless wings.
She was like a bit of Dresden china, and I was continually impressed with what I may call her fragility.
As at the time I caught her arm when helping her below, so at any time I was quite prepared, should stress or rough handling befall her, to see her crumble away.
I have never seen body and spirit in such perfect accord.
Describe her verse, as the critics have described it, as sublimated and spiritual, and you have described her body.
It seemed to partake of her soul, to have analogous attributes, and to link it to life with the slenderest of chains.
Indeed, she trod the earth lightly, and in her constitution there was little of the robust clay.
She was in striking contrast to Wolf Larsen.
Each was nothing that the other was, everything that the other was not.
I noted them walking the deck together one morning, and I likened them to the extreme ends of the human ladder of evolution - the one the culmination of all savagery, the other the finished product of the finest civilization.
True, Wolf Larsen possessed intellect to an unusual degree, but it was directed solely to the exercise of his savage instincts and made him but the more formidable a savage.
He was splendidly muscled, a heavy man, and though he strode with the certitude and directness of the physical man, there was nothing heavy about his stride.
The jungle and the wilderness lurked in the uplift and downput of his feet.
He was cat-footed, and lithe, and strong, always strong.
I likened him to some great tiger, a beast of prowess and prey.
He looked it, and the piercing glitter that arose at times in his eyes was the same piercing glitter I had observed in the eyes of caged leopards and other preying creatures of the wild.
But this day, as I noted them pacing up and down, I saw that it was she who terminated the walk.
They came up to where I was standing by the entrance to the companion-way.
Though she betrayed it by no outward sign, I felt, somehow, that she was greatly perturbed.
She made some idle remark, looking at me, and laughed lightly enough; but I saw her eyes return to his, involuntarily, as though fascinated; then they fell, but not swiftly enough to veil the rush of terror that filled them.
It was in his eyes that I saw the cause of her perturbation.
Ordinarily grey and cold and harsh, they were now warm and soft and golden, and all a-dance with tiny lights that dimmed and faded, or welled up till the full orbs were flooded with a glowing radiance.
Perhaps it was to this that the golden colour was due; but golden his eyes were, enticing and masterful, at the same time luring and compelling, and speaking a demand and clamour of the blood which no woman, much less Maud Brewster, could misunderstand.
Her own terror rushed upon me, and in that moment of fear - the most terrible fear a man can experience - I knew that in inexpressible ways she was dear to me.
The knowledge that I loved her rushed upon me with the terror, and with both emotions gripping at my heart and causing my blood at the same time to chill and to leap riotously, I felt myself drawn by a power without me and beyond me, and found my eyes returning against my will to gaze into the eyes of Wolf Larsen.
But he had recovered himself.
The golden colour and the dancing lights were gone.
Cold and grey and glittering they were as he bowed brusquely and turned away.
"I am afraid," she whispered, with a shiver.
"I am so afraid."
I, too, was afraid, and what of my discovery of how much she meant to me my mind was in a turmoil; but, I succeeded in answering quite calmly:
"All will come right, Miss Brewster.
Trust me, it will come right."
She answered with a grateful little smile that sent my heart pounding, and started to descend the companion-stairs.
For a long while I remained standing where she had left me.
There was imperative need to adjust myself, to consider the significance of the changed aspect of things.
It had come, at last, love had come, when I least expected it and under the most forbidding conditions.
Of course, my philosophy had always recognized the inevitableness of the love-call sooner or later; but long years of bookish silence had made me inattentive and unprepared.
And now it had come!
Maud Brewster!
My memory flashed back to that first thin little volume on my desk, and I saw before me, as though in the concrete, the row of thin little volumes on my library shelf.
How I had welcomed each of them!
Each year one had come from the press, and to me each was the advent of the year.
They had voiced a kindred intellect and spirit, and as such I had received them into a camaraderie of the mind; but now their place was in my heart.
My heart?
A revulsion of feeling came over me.
I seemed to stand outside myself and to look at myself incredulously.
Maud Brewster!
Humphrey Van Weyden, "the cold-blooded fish," the "emotionless monster," the "analytical demon," of Charley Furuseth's christening, in love!
And then, without rhyme or reason, all sceptical, my mind flew back to a small biographical note in the red-bound Who's Who, and I said to myself, "She was born in Cambridge, and she is twenty-seven years old."
And then I said, "Twenty-seven years old and still free and fancy free?"
But how did I know she was fancy free?
And the pang of new-born jealousy put all incredulity to flight.
There was no doubt about it.
I was jealous; therefore I loved.
And the woman I loved was Maud Brewster.
I, Humphrey Van Weyden, was in love!
And again the doubt assailed me.
Not that I was afraid of it, however, or reluctant to meet it.
On the contrary, idealist that I was to the most pronounced degree, my philosophy had always recognized and guerdoned love as the greatest thing in the world, the aim and the summit of being, the most exquisite pitch of joy and happiness to which life could thrill, the thing of all things to be hailed and welcomed and taken into the heart.
But now that it had come I could not believe.
I could not be so fortunate.
It was too good, too good to be true.
Symons's lines came into my head:
"I wandered all these years among
A world of women, seeking you."
And then I had ceased seeking.
It was not for me, this greatest thing in the world, I had decided.
Furuseth was right; I was abnormal, an "emotionless monster," a strange bookish creature, capable of pleasuring in sensations only of the mind.
And though I had been surrounded by women all my days, my appreciation of them had been aesthetic and nothing more.
I had actually, at times, considered myself outside the pale, a monkish fellow denied the eternal or the passing passions I saw and understood so well in others.
And now it had come!
Undreamed of and unheralded, it had come.
In what could have been no less than an ecstasy, I left my post at the head of the companion-way and started along the deck, murmuring to myself those beautiful lines of Mrs. Browning:
"I lived with visions for my company
Instead of men and women years ago,
And found them gentle mates, nor thought to know
A sweeter music than they played to me."
But the sweeter music was playing in my ears, and I was blind and oblivious to all about me.
The sharp voice of Wolf Larsen aroused me.
"What the hell are you up to?"
he was demanding.
I had strayed forward where the sailors were painting, and I came to myself to find my advancing foot on the verge of overturning a paint-pot.
"Sleep-walking, sunstroke, - what?"
he barked.
"No; indigestion," I retorted, and continued my walk as if nothing untoward had occurred.
Among the most vivid memories of my life are those of the events on the Ghost which occurred during the forty hours succeeding the discovery of my love for Maud Brewster.
I, who had lived my life in quiet places, only to enter at the age of thirty-five upon a course of the most irrational adventure I could have imagined, never had more incident and excitement crammed into any forty hours of my experience.
Nor can I quite close my ears to a small voice of pride which tells me I did not do so badly, all things considered.
To begin with, at the midday dinner, Wolf Larsen informed the hunters that they were to eat thenceforth in the steerage.
It was an unprecedented thing on sealing-schooners, where it is the custom for the hunters to rank, unofficially as officers.
He gave no reason, but his motive was obvious enough.
Horner and Smoke had been displaying a gallantry toward Maud Brewster, ludicrous in itself and inoffensive to her, but to him evidently distasteful.
The announcement was received with black silence, though the other four hunters glanced significantly at the two who had been the cause of their banishment.
Jock Horner, quiet as was his way, gave no sign; but the blood surged darkly across Smoke's forehead, and he half opened his mouth to speak.
Wolf Larsen was watching him, waiting for him, the steely glitter in his eyes; but Smoke closed his mouth again without having said anything.
"Anything to say?"
the other demanded aggressively.
It was a challenge, but Smoke refused to accept it.
"About what?"
he asked, so innocently that Wolf Larsen was disconcerted, while the others smiled.
"Oh, nothing," Wolf Larsen said lamely.
"I just thought you might want to register a kick."
"About what?"
asked the imperturbable Smoke.
Smoke's mates were now smiling broadly.
His captain could have killed him, and I doubt not that blood would have flowed had not Maud Brewster been present.
For that matter, it was her presence which enabled Smoke to act as he did.
He was too discreet and cautious a man to incur Wolf Larsen's anger at a time when that anger could be expressed in terms stronger than words.
I was in fear that a struggle might take place, but a cry from the helmsman made it easy for the situation to save itself.
"Smoke ho!"
the cry came down the open companion-way.
"How's it bear?"
Wolf Larsen called up.
"Dead astern, sir."
"Maybe it's a Russian," suggested Latimer.
His words brought anxiety into the faces of the other hunters.
A Russian could mean but one thing - a cruiser.
The hunters, never more than roughly aware of the position of the ship, nevertheless knew that we were close to the boundaries of the forbidden sea, while Wolf Larsen's record as a poacher was notorious.
All eyes centred upon him.
"We're dead safe," he assured them with a laugh.
"No salt mines this time, Smoke.
But I'll tell you what - I'll lay odds of five to one it's the Macedonia."
No one accepted his offer, and he went on: "In which event, I'll lay ten to one there's trouble breezing up."
"No, thank you," Latimer spoke up.
"I don't object to losing my money, but I like to get a run for it anyway.
There never was a time when there wasn't trouble when you and that brother of yours got together, and I'll lay twenty to one on that."
A general smile followed, in which Wolf Larsen joined, and the dinner went on smoothly, thanks to me, for he treated me abominably the rest of the meal, sneering at me and patronizing me till I was all a-tremble with suppressed rage.
Yet I knew I must control myself for Maud Brewster's sake, and I received my reward when her eyes caught mine for a fleeting second, and they said, as distinctly as if she spoke, "Be brave, be brave."
We left the table to go on deck, for a steamer was a welcome break in the monotony of the sea on which we floated, while the conviction that it was Death Larsen and the Macedonia added to the excitement.
The stiff breeze and heavy sea which had sprung up the previous afternoon had been moderating all morning, so that it was now possible to lower the boats for an afternoon's hunt.
The hunting promised to be profitable.
We had sailed since daylight across a sea barren of seals, and were now running into the herd.
The smoke was still miles astern, but overhauling us rapidly, when we lowered our boats.
They spread out and struck a northerly course across the ocean.
Now and again we saw a sail lower, heard the reports of the shot-guns, and saw the sail go up again.
The seals were thick, the wind was dying away; everything favoured a big catch.
As we ran off to get our leeward position of the last lee boat, we found the ocean fairly carpeted with sleeping seals.
They were all about us, thicker than I had ever seen them before, in twos and threes and bunches, stretched full length on the surface and sleeping for all the world like so many lazy young dogs.
Under the approaching smoke the hull and upper-works of a steamer were growing larger.
It was the Macedonia.
I read her name through the glasses as she passed by scarcely a mile to starboard.
Wolf Larsen looked savagely at the vessel, while Maud Brewster was curious.
"Where is the trouble you were so sure was breezing up, Captain Larsen?"
she asked gaily.
He glanced at her, a moment's amusement softening his features.
"What did you expect?
That they'd come aboard and cut our throats?"
"Something like that," she confessed.
"You understand, seal-hunters are so new and strange to me that I am quite ready to expect anything."
He nodded his head.
"Quite right, quite right.
Your error is that you failed to expect the worst."
"Why, what can be worse than cutting our throats?"
she asked, with pretty naïve surprise.
"Cutting our purses," he answered.
"Man is so made these days that his capacity for living is determined by the money he possesses."
"'Who steals my purse steals trash,'" she quoted.
"Who steals my purse steals my right to live," was the reply, "old saws to the contrary.
For he steals my bread and meat and bed, and in so doing imperils my life.
There are not enough soup-kitchens and bread-lines to go around, you know, and when men have nothing in their purses they usually die, and die miserably - unless they are able to fill their purses pretty speedily."
"But I fail to see that this steamer has any designs on your purse."
"Wait and you will see," he answered grimly.
We did not have long to wait.
Having passed several miles beyond our line of boats, the Macedonia proceeded to lower her own.
We knew she carried fourteen boats to our five (we were one short through the desertion of Wainwright), and she began dropping them far to leeward of our last boat, continued dropping them athwart our course, and finished dropping them far to windward of our first weather boat.
The hunting, for us, was spoiled.
There were no seals behind us, and ahead of us the line of fourteen boats, like a huge broom, swept the herd before it.
Our boats hunted across the two or three miles of water between them and the point where the Macedonia's had been dropped, and then headed for home.
The wind had fallen to a whisper, the ocean was growing calmer and calmer, and this, coupled with the presence of the great herd, made a perfect hunting day - one of the two or three days to be encountered in the whole of a lucky season.
An angry lot of men, boat-pullers and steerers as well as hunters, swarmed over our side.
Each man felt that he had been robbed; and the boats were hoisted in amid curses, which, if curses had power, would have settled Death Larsen for all eternity - "Dead and damned for a dozen iv eternities," commented Louis, his eyes twinkling up at me as he rested from hauling taut the lashings of his boat.
"Listen to them, and find if it is hard to discover the most vital thing in their souls," said Wolf Larsen.
"Faith?
and love?
and high ideals?
The good?
the beautiful?
the true?"
"Their innate sense of right has been violated," Maud Brewster said, joining the conversation.
She was standing a dozen feet away, one hand resting on the main-shrouds and her body swaying gently to the slight roll of the ship.
She had not raised her voice, and yet I was struck by its clear and bell-like tone.
Ah, it was sweet in my ears!
I scarcely dared look at her just then, for the fear of betraying myself.
A boy's cap was perched on her head, and her hair, light brown and arranged in a loose and fluffy order that caught the sun, seemed an aureole about the delicate oval of her face.
She was positively bewitching, and, withal, sweetly spirituelle, if not saintly.
All my old-time marvel at life returned to me at sight of this splendid incarnation of it, and Wolf Larsen's cold explanation of life and its meaning was truly ridiculous and laughable.
"A sentimentalist," he sneered, "like Mr. Van Weyden.
Those men are cursing because their desires have been outraged.
That is all.
What desires?
The desires for the good grub and soft beds ashore which a handsome pay-day brings them - the women and the drink, the gorging and the beastliness which so truly expresses them, the best that is in them, their highest aspirations, their ideals, if you please.
The exhibition they make of their feelings is not a touching sight, yet it shows how deeply they have been touched, how deeply their purses have been touched, for to lay hands on their purses is to lay hands on their souls."
"'You hardly behave as if your purse had been touched," she said, smilingly.
"Then it so happens that I am behaving differently, for my purse and my soul have both been touched.
At the current price of skins in the London market, and based on a fair estimate of what the afternoon's catch would have been had not the Macedonia hogged it, the Ghost has lost about fifteen hundred dollars' worth of skins."
"You speak so calmly - " she began.
"But I do not feel calm; I could kill the man who robbed me," he interrupted.
"Yes, yes, I know, and that man my brother - more sentiment!
Bah!"
His face underwent a sudden change.
His voice was less harsh and wholly sincere as he said:
"You must be happy, you sentimentalists, really and truly happy at dreaming and finding things good, and, because you find some of them good, feeling good yourself.
Now, tell me, you two, do you find me good?"
"You are good to look upon - in a way," I qualified.
"There are in you all powers for good," was Maud Brewster's answer.
"There you are!"
he cried at her, half angrily.
"Your words are empty to me.
There is nothing clear and sharp and definite about the thought you have expressed.
You cannot pick it up in your two hands and look at it.
In point of fact, it is not a thought.
It is a feeling, a sentiment, a something based upon illusion and not a product of the intellect at all."
As he went on his voice again grew soft, and a confiding note came into it.
"Do you know, I sometimes catch myself wishing that I, too, were blind to the facts of life and only knew its fancies and illusions.
They're wrong, all wrong, of course, and contrary to reason; but in the face of them my reason tells me, wrong and most wrong, that to dream and live illusions gives greater delight.
And after all, delight is the wage for living.
Without delight, living is a worthless act.
To labour at living and be unpaid is worse than to be dead.
He who delights the most lives the most, and your dreams and unrealities are less disturbing to you and more gratifying than are my facts to me."
He shook his head slowly, pondering.
"I often doubt, I often doubt, the worthwhileness of reason.
Dreams must be more substantial and satisfying.
Emotional delight is more filling and lasting than intellectual delight; and, besides, you pay for your moments of intellectual delight by having the blues.
Emotional delight is followed by no more than jaded senses which speedily recuperate.
I envy you, I envy you."
He stopped abruptly, and then on his lips formed one of his strange quizzical smiles, as he added:
"It's from my brain I envy you, take notice, and not from my heart.
My reason dictates it.
The envy is an intellectual product.
I am like a sober man looking upon drunken men, and, greatly weary, wishing he, too, were drunk."
"Or like a wise man looking upon fools and wishing he, too, were a fool," I laughed.
"Quite so," he said.
"You are a blessed, bankrupt pair of fools.
You have no facts in your pocketbook."
"Yet we spend as freely as you," was Maud Brewster's contribution.
"More freely, because it costs you nothing."
"And because we draw upon eternity," she retorted.
"Whether you do or think you do, it's the same thing.
You spend what you haven't got, and in return you get greater value from spending what you haven't got than I get from spending what I have got, and what I have sweated to get."
"Why don't you change the basis of your coinage, then?"
she queried teasingly.
He looked at her quickly, half-hopefully, and then said, all regretfully: "Too late.
I'd like to, perhaps, but I can't.
My pocketbook is stuffed with the old coinage, and it's a stubborn thing.
I can never bring myself to recognize anything else as valid."
He ceased speaking, and his gaze wandered absently past her and became lost in the placid sea.
The old primal melancholy was strong upon him.
He was quivering to it.
He had reasoned himself into a spell of the blues, and within few hours one could look for the devil within him to be up and stirring.
I remembered Charley Furuseth, and knew this man's sadness as the penalty which the materialist ever pays for his materialism.
"You've been on deck, Mr. Van Weyden," Wolf Larsen said, the following morning at the breakfast-table, "How do things look?"
"Clear enough," I answered, glancing at the sunshine which streamed down the open companion-way.
"Fair westerly breeze, with a promise of stiffening, if Louis predicts correctly."
He nodded his head in a pleased way.
"Any signs of fog?"
"Thick banks in the north and north-west."
He nodded his head again, evincing even greater satisfaction than before.
"What of the Macedonia?"
"Not sighted," I answered.
I could have sworn his face fell at the intelligence, but why he should be disappointed I could not conceive.
I was soon to learn.
"Smoke ho!"
came the hail from on deck, and his face brightened.
"Good!"
he exclaimed, and left the table at once to go on deck and into the steerage, where the hunters were taking the first breakfast of their exile.
Maud Brewster and I scarcely touched the food before us, gazing, instead, in silent anxiety at each other, and listening to Wolf Larsen's voice, which easily penetrated the cabin through the intervening bulkhead.
He spoke at length, and his conclusion was greeted with a wild roar of cheers.
The bulkhead was too thick for us to hear what he said; but whatever it was it affected the hunters strongly, for the cheering was followed by loud exclamations and shouts of joy.
From the sounds on deck I knew that the sailors had been routed out and were preparing to lower the boats.
Maud Brewster accompanied me on deck, but I left her at the break of the poop, where she might watch the scene and not be in it.
The sailors must have learned whatever project was on hand, and the vim and snap they put into their work attested their enthusiasm.
The hunters came trooping on deck with shot-guns and ammunition-boxes, and, most unusual, their rifles.
The latter were rarely taken in the boats, for a seal shot at long range with a rifle invariably sank before a boat could reach it.
But each hunter this day had his rifle and a large supply of cartridges.
I noticed they grinned with satisfaction whenever they looked at the Macedonia's smoke, which was rising higher and higher as she approached from the west.
The five boats went over the side with a rush, spread out like the ribs of a fan, and set a northerly course, as on the preceding afternoon, for us to follow.
I watched for some time, curiously, but there seemed nothing extraordinary about their behaviour.
They lowered sails, shot seals, and hoisted sails again, and continued on their way as I had always seen them do.
The Macedonia repeated her performance of yesterday, "hogging" the sea by dropping her line of boats in advance of ours and across our course.
Fourteen boats require a considerable spread of ocean for comfortable hunting, and when she had completely lapped our line she continued steaming into the north-east, dropping more boats as she went.
"What's up?"
I asked Wolf Larsen, unable longer to keep my curiosity in check.
"Never mind what's up," he answered gruffly.
"You won't be a thousand years in finding out, and in the meantime just pray for plenty of wind."
"Oh, well, I don't mind telling you," he said the next moment.
"I'm going to give that brother of mine a taste of his own medicine.
In short, I'm going to play the hog myself, and not for one day, but for the rest of the season, - if we're in luck."
"And if we're not?"
I queried.
"Not to be considered," he laughed.
"We simply must be in luck, or it's all up with us."
He had the wheel at the time, and I went forward to my hospital in the forecastle, where lay the two crippled men, Nilson and Thomas Mugridge.
Nilson was as cheerful as could be expected, for his broken leg was knitting nicely; but the Cockney was desperately melancholy, and I was aware of a great sympathy for the unfortunate creature.
And the marvel of it was that still he lived and clung to life.
The brutal years had reduced his meagre body to splintered wreckage, and yet the spark of life within burned brightly as ever.
"With an artificial foot - and they make excellent ones - you will be stumping ships' galleys to the end of time," I assured him jovially.
But his answer was serious, nay, solemn.
"I don't know about wot you s'y, Mr. Van W'yden, but I do know I'll never rest 'appy till I see that 'ell-'ound bloody well dead.
'E cawn't live as long as me.
'E's got no right to live, an' as the Good Word puts it, ''E shall shorely die,' an' I s'y, 'Amen, an' damn soon at that.'"
When I returned on deck I found Wolf Larsen steering mainly with one hand, while with the other hand he held the marine glasses and studied the situation of the boats, paying particular attention to the position of the Macedonia.
The only change noticeable in our boats was that they had hauled close on the wind and were heading several points west of north.
Still, I could not see the expediency of the manoeuvre, for the free sea was still intercepted by the Macedonia's five weather boats, which, in turn, had hauled close on the wind.
Thus they slowly diverged toward the west, drawing farther away from the remainder of the boats in their line.
Our boats were rowing as well as sailing.
Even the hunters were pulling, and with three pairs of oars in the water they rapidly overhauled what I may appropriately term the enemy.
The smoke of the Macedonia had dwindled to a dim blot on the north-eastern horizon.
Of the steamer herself nothing was to be seen.
We had been loafing along, till now, our sails shaking half the time and spilling the wind; and twice, for short periods, we had been hove to.
But there was no more loafing.
Sheets were trimmed, and Wolf Larsen proceeded to put the Ghost through her paces.
We ran past our line of boats and bore down upon the first weather boat of the other line.
"Down that flying jib, Mr. Van Weyden," Wolf Larsen commanded.
"And stand by to back over the jibs."
I ran forward and had the downhaul of the flying jib all in and fast as we slipped by the boat a hundred feet to leeward.
The three men in it gazed at us suspiciously.
They had been hogging the sea, and they knew Wolf Larsen, by reputation at any rate.
I noted that the hunter, a huge Scandinavian sitting in the bow, held his rifle, ready to hand, across his knees.
It should have been in its proper place in the rack.
When they came opposite our stern, Wolf Larsen greeted them with a wave of the hand, and cried:
"Come on board and have a 'gam'!"
"To gam," among the sealing-schooners, is a substitute for the verbs "to visit," "to gossip."
It expresses the garrulity of the sea, and is a pleasant break in the monotony of the life.
The Ghost swung around into the wind, and I finished my work forward in time to run aft and lend a hand with the mainsheet.
"You will please stay on deck, Miss Brewster," Wolf Larsen said, as he started forward to meet his guest.
"And you too, Mr. Van Weyden."
The boat had lowered its sail and run alongside.
The hunter, golden bearded like a sea-king, came over the rail and dropped on deck.
But his hugeness could not quite overcome his apprehensiveness.
Doubt and distrust showed strongly in his face.
It was a transparent face, for all of its hairy shield, and advertised instant relief when he glanced from Wolf Larsen to me, noted that there was only the pair of us, and then glanced over his own two men who had joined him.
Surely he had little reason to be afraid.
He towered like a Goliath above Wolf Larsen.
He must have measured six feet eight or nine inches in stature, and I subsequently learned his weight - 240 pounds.
And there was no fat about him.
It was all bone and muscle.
A return of apprehension was apparent when, at the top of the companion-way, Wolf Larsen invited him below.
But he reassured himself with a glance down at his host - a big man himself but dwarfed by the propinquity of the giant.
So all hesitancy vanished, and the pair descended into the cabin.
In the meantime, his two men, as was the wont of visiting sailors, had gone forward into the forecastle to do some visiting themselves.
Suddenly, from the cabin came a great, choking bellow, followed by all the sounds of a furious struggle.
It was the leopard and the lion, and the lion made all the noise.
Wolf Larsen was the leopard.
"You see the sacredness of our hospitality," I said bitterly to Maud Brewster.
She nodded her head that she heard, and I noted in her face the signs of the same sickness at sight or sound of violent struggle from which I had suffered so severely during my first weeks on the Ghost.
"Wouldn't it be better if you went forward, say by the steerage companion-way, until it is over?"
I suggested.
She shook her head and gazed at me pitifully.
She was not frightened, but appalled, rather, at the human animality of it.
"You will understand," I took advantage of the opportunity to say, "whatever part I take in what is going on and what is to come, that I am compelled to take it - if you and I are ever to get out of this scrape with our lives."
"It is not nice - for me," I added.
"I understand," she said, in a weak, far-away voice, and her eyes showed me that she did understand.
The sounds from below soon died away.
Then Wolf Larsen came alone on deck.
There was a slight flush under his bronze, but otherwise he bore no signs of the battle.
"Send those two men aft, Mr. Van Weyden," he said.
I obeyed, and a minute or two later they stood before him.
"Hoist in your boat," he said to them.
"Your hunter's decided to stay aboard awhile and doesn't want it pounding alongside."
"Hoist in your boat, I said," he repeated, this time in sharper tones as they hesitated to do his bidding.
"Who knows?
you may have to sail with me for a time," he said, quite softly, with a silken threat that belied the softness, as they moved slowly to comply, "and we might as well start with a friendly understanding.
Lively now!
Death Larsen makes you jump better than that, and you know it!"
Their movements perceptibly quickened under his coaching, and as the boat swung inboard I was sent forward to let go the jibs.
Wolf Larsen, at the wheel, directed the Ghost after the Macedonia's second weather boat.
Under way, and with nothing for the time being to do, I turned my attention to the situation of the boats.
The Macedonia's third weather boat was being attacked by two of ours, the fourth by our remaining three; and the fifth, turn about, was taking a hand in the defence of its nearest mate.
The fight had opened at long distance, and the rifles were cracking steadily.
A quick, snappy sea was being kicked up by the wind, a condition which prevented fine shooting; and now and again, as we drew closer, we could see the bullets zip-zipping from wave to wave.
The boat we were pursuing had squared away and was running before the wind to escape us, and, in the course of its flight, to take part in repulsing our general boat attack.
Attending to sheets and tacks now left me little time to see what was taking place, but I happened to be on the poop when Wolf Larsen ordered the two strange sailors forward and into the forecastle.
They went sullenly, but they went.
He next ordered Miss Brewster below, and smiled at the instant horror that leapt into her eyes.
"You'll find nothing gruesome down there," he said, "only an unhurt man securely made fast to the ring-bolts.
Bullets are liable to come aboard, and I don't want you killed, you know."
Even as he spoke, a bullet was deflected by a brass-capped spoke of the wheel between his hands and screeched off through the air to windward.
"You see," he said to her; and then to me, "Mr. Van Weyden, will you take the wheel?"
Maud Brewster had stepped inside the companion-way so that only her head was exposed.
Wolf Larsen had procured a rifle and was throwing a cartridge into the barrel.
I begged her with my eyes to go below, but she smiled and said:
"We may be feeble land-creatures without legs, but we can show Captain Larsen that we are at least as brave as he."
He gave her a quick look of admiration.
"I like you a hundred per cent.
better for that," he said.
"Books, and brains, and bravery.
You are well-rounded, a blue-stocking fit to be the wife of a pirate chief.
Ahem, we'll discuss that later," he smiled, as a bullet struck solidly into the cabin wall.
I saw his eyes flash golden as he spoke, and I saw the terror mount in her own.
"We are braver," I hastened to say.
"At least, speaking for myself, I know I am braver than Captain Larsen."
It was I who was now favoured by a quick look.
He was wondering if I were making fun of him.
I put three or four spokes over to counteract a sheer toward the wind on the part of the Ghost, and then steadied her.
Wolf Larsen was still waiting an explanation, and I pointed down to my knees.
"You will observe there," I said, "a slight trembling.
It is because I am afraid, the flesh is afraid; and I am afraid in my mind because I do not wish to die.
But my spirit masters the trembling flesh and the qualms of the mind.
I am more than brave.
I am courageous.
Your flesh is not afraid.
You are not afraid.
On the one hand, it costs you nothing to encounter danger; on the other hand, it even gives you delight.
You enjoy it.
You may be unafraid, Mr. Larsen, but you must grant that the bravery is mine."
"You're right," he acknowledged at once.
"I never thought of it in that way before.
But is the opposite true?
If you are braver than I, am I more cowardly than you?"
We both laughed at the absurdity, and he dropped down to the deck and rested his rifle across the rail.
The bullets we had received had travelled nearly a mile, but by now we had cut that distance in half.
He fired three careful shots.
The first struck fifty feet to windward of the boat, the second alongside; and at the third the boat-steerer let loose his steering-oar and crumpled up in the bottom of the boat.
"I guess that'll fix them," Wolf Larsen said, rising to his feet.
"I couldn't afford to let the hunter have it, and there is a chance the boat-puller doesn't know how to steer.
In which case, the hunter cannot steer and shoot at the same time."
His reasoning was justified, for the boat rushed at once into the wind and the hunter sprang aft to take the boat-steerer's place.
There was no more shooting, though the rifles were still cracking merrily from the other boats.
The hunter had managed to get the boat before the wind again, but we ran down upon it, going at least two feet to its one.
A hundred yards away, I saw the boat-puller pass a rifle to the hunter.
Wolf Larsen went amidships and took the coil of the throat-halyards from its pin.
Then he peered over the rail with levelled rifle.
Twice I saw the hunter let go the steering-oar with one hand, reach for his rifle, and hesitate.
We were now alongside and foaming past.
"Here, you!"
Wolf Larsen cried suddenly to the boat-puller.
"Take a turn!"
At the same time he flung the coil of rope.
It struck fairly, nearly knocking the man over, but he did not obey.
Instead, he looked to his hunter for orders.
The hunter, in turn, was in a quandary.
His rifle was between his knees, but if he let go the steering-oar in order to shoot, the boat would sweep around and collide with the schooner.
Also he saw Wolf Larsen's rifle bearing upon him and knew he would be shot ere he could get his rifle into play.
"Take a turn," he said quietly to the man.
The boat-puller obeyed, taking a turn around the little forward thwart and paying the line as it jerked taut.
The boat sheered out with a rush, and the hunter steadied it to a parallel course some twenty feet from the side of the Ghost.
"Now, get that sail down and come alongside!"
Wolf Larsen ordered.
He never let go his rifle, even passing down the tackles with one hand.
When they were fast, bow and stern, and the two uninjured men prepared to come aboard, the hunter picked up his rifle as if to place it in a secure position.
"Drop it!"
Wolf Larsen cried, and the hunter dropped it as though it were hot and had burned him.
Once aboard, the two prisoners hoisted in the boat and under Wolf Larsen's direction carried the wounded boat-steerer down into the forecastle.
"If our five boats do as well as you and I have done, we'll have a pretty full crew," Wolf Larsen said to me.
"The man you shot - he is - I hope?"
Maud Brewster quavered.
"In the shoulder," he answered.
"Nothing serious, Mr. Van Weyden will pull him around as good as ever in three or four weeks."
"But he won't pull those chaps around, from the look of it," he added, pointing at the Macedonia's third boat, for which I had been steering and which was now nearly abreast of us.
"That's Horner's and Smoke's work.
I told them we wanted live men, not carcasses.
But the joy of shooting to hit is a most compelling thing, when once you've learned how to shoot.
Ever experienced it, Mr. Van Weyden?"
I shook my head and regarded their work.
It had indeed been bloody, for they had drawn off and joined our other three boats in the attack on the remaining two of the enemy.
The deserted boat was in the trough of the sea, rolling drunkenly across each comber, its loose spritsail out at right angles to it and fluttering and flapping in the wind.
The hunter and boat-puller were both lying awkwardly in the bottom, but the boat-steerer lay across the gunwale, half in and half out, his arms trailing in the water and his head rolling from side to side.
"Don't look, Miss Brewster, please don't look," I had begged of her, and I was glad that she had minded me and been spared the sight.
"Head right into the bunch, Mr. Van Weyden," was Wolf Larsen's command.
As we drew nearer, the firing ceased, and we saw that the fight was over.
The remaining two boats had been captured by our five, and the seven were grouped together, waiting to be picked up.
"Look at that!"
I cried involuntarily, pointing to the north-east.
The blot of smoke which indicated the Macedonia's position had reappeared.
"Yes, I've been watching it," was Wolf Larsen's calm reply.
He measured the distance away to the fog-bank, and for an instant paused to feel the weight of the wind on his cheek.
"We'll make it, I think; but you can depend upon it that blessed brother of mine has twigged our little game and is just a-humping for us.
Ah, look at that!"
The blot of smoke had suddenly grown larger, and it was very black.
"I'll beat you out, though, brother mine," he chuckled.
"I'll beat you out, and I hope you no worse than that you rack your old engines into scrap."
When we hove to, a hasty though orderly confusion reigned.
The boats came aboard from every side at once.
As fast as the prisoners came over the rail they were marshalled forward to the forecastle by our hunters, while our sailors hoisted in the boats, pell-mell, dropping them anywhere upon the deck and not stopping to lash them.
We were already under way, all sails set and drawing, and the sheets being slacked off for a wind abeam, as the last boat lifted clear of the water and swung in the tackles.
There was need for haste.
The Macedonia, belching the blackest of smoke from her funnel, was charging down upon us from out of the north-east.
Neglecting the boats that remained to her, she had altered her course so as to anticipate ours.
She was not running straight for us, but ahead of us.
Our courses were converging like the sides of an angle, the vertex of which was at the edge of the fog-bank.
It was there, or not at all, that the Macedonia could hope to catch us.
The hope for the Ghost lay in that she should pass that point before the Macedonia arrived at it.
Wolf Larsen was steering, his eyes glistening and snapping as they dwelt upon and leaped from detail to detail of the chase.
Now he studied the sea to windward for signs of the wind slackening or freshening, now the Macedonia; and again, his eyes roved over every sail, and he gave commands to slack a sheet here a trifle, to come in on one there a trifle, till he was drawing out of the Ghost the last bit of speed she possessed.
All feuds and grudges were forgotten, and I was surprised at the alacrity with which the men who had so long endured his brutality sprang to execute his orders.
Strange to say, the unfortunate Johnson came into my mind as we lifted and surged and heeled along, and I was aware of a regret that he was not alive and present; he had so loved the Ghost and delighted in her sailing powers.
"Better get your rifles, you fellows," Wolf Larsen called to our hunters; and the five men lined the lee rail, guns in hand, and waited.
The Macedonia was now but a mile away, the black smoke pouring from her funnel at a right angle, so madly she raced, pounding through the sea at a seventeen-knot gait - "'Sky-hooting through the brine," as Wolf Larsen quoted while gazing at her.
We were not making more than nine knots, but the fog-bank was very near.
A puff of smoke broke from the Macedonia's deck, we heard a heavy report, and a round hole took form in the stretched canvas of our mainsail.
They were shooting at us with one of the small cannon which rumour had said they carried on board.
Our men, clustering amidships, waved their hats and raised a derisive cheer.
Again there was a puff of smoke and a loud report, this time the cannon-ball striking not more than twenty feet astern and glancing twice from sea to sea to windward ere it sank.
But there was no rifle-firing for the reason that all their hunters were out in the boats or our prisoners.
When the two vessels were half-a-mile apart, a third shot made another hole in our mainsail.
Then we entered the fog.
It was about us, veiling and hiding us in its dense wet gauze.
The sudden transition was startling.
The moment before we had been leaping through the sunshine, the clear sky above us, the sea breaking and rolling wide to the horizon, and a ship, vomiting smoke and fire and iron missiles, rushing madly upon us.
And at once, as in an instant's leap, the sun was blotted out, there was no sky, even our mastheads were lost to view, and our horizon was such as tear-blinded eyes may see.
The grey mist drove by us like a rain.
Every woollen filament of our garments, every hair of our heads and faces, was jewelled with a crystal globule.
The shrouds were wet with moisture; it dripped from our rigging overhead; and on the underside of our booms drops of water took shape in long swaying lines, which were detached and flung to the deck in mimic showers at each surge of the schooner.
I was aware of a pent, stifled feeling.
As the sounds of the ship thrusting herself through the waves were hurled back upon us by the fog, so were one's thoughts.
The mind recoiled from contemplation of a world beyond this wet veil which wrapped us around.
This was the world, the universe itself, its bounds so near one felt impelled to reach out both arms and push them back.
It was impossible, that the rest could be beyond these walls of grey.
The rest was a dream, no more than the memory of a dream.
It was weird, strangely weird.
I looked at Maud Brewster and knew that she was similarly affected.
Then I looked at Wolf Larsen, but there was nothing subjective about his state of consciousness.
His whole concern was with the immediate, objective present.
He still held the wheel, and I felt that he was timing Time, reckoning the passage of the minutes with each forward lunge and leeward roll of the Ghost.
"Go for'ard and hard alee without any noise," he said to me in a low voice.
"Clew up the topsails first.
Set men at all the sheets.
Let there be no rattling of blocks, no sound of voices.
No noise, understand, no noise."
When all was ready, the word "hard-a-lee" was passed forward to me from man to man; and the Ghost heeled about on the port tack with practically no noise at all.
And what little there was, - the slapping of a few reef-points and the creaking of a sheave in a block or two, - was ghostly under the hollow echoing pall in which we were swathed.
We had scarcely filled away, it seemed, when the fog thinned abruptly and we were again in the sunshine, the wide-stretching sea breaking before us to the sky-line.
But the ocean was bare.
No wrathful Macedonia broke its surface nor blackened the sky with her smoke.
Wolf Larsen at once squared away and ran down along the rim of the fog-bank.
His trick was obvious.
He had entered the fog to windward of the steamer, and while the steamer had blindly driven on into the fog in the chance of catching him, he had come about and out of his shelter and was now running down to re-enter to leeward.
Successful in this, the old simile of the needle in the haystack would be mild indeed compared with his brother's chance of finding him.
He did not run long.
Jibing the fore- and main-sails and setting the topsails again, we headed back into the bank.
As we entered I could have sworn I saw a vague bulk emerging to windward.
I looked quickly at Wolf Larsen.
Already we were ourselves buried in the fog, but he nodded his head.
He, too, had seen it - the Macedonia, guessing his manoeuvre and failing by a moment in anticipating it.
There was no doubt that we had escaped unseen.
"He can't keep this up," Wolf Larsen said.
"He'll have to go back for the rest of his boats.
Send a man to the wheel, Mr. Van Weyden, keep this course for the present, and you might as well set the watches, for we won't do any lingering to-night."
"I'd give five hundred dollars, though," he added, "just to be aboard the Macedonia for five minutes, listening to my brother curse."
"And now, Mr. Van Weyden," he said to me when he had been relieved from the wheel, "we must make these new-comers welcome.
Serve out plenty of whisky to the hunters and see that a few bottles slip for'ard.
I'll wager every man Jack of them is over the side to-morrow, hunting for Wolf Larsen as contentedly as ever they hunted for Death Larsen."
"But won't they escape as Wainwright did?"
I asked.
He laughed shrewdly.
"Not as long as our old hunters have anything to say about it.
I'm dividing amongst them a dollar a skin for all the skins shot by our new hunters.
At least half of their enthusiasm to-day was due to that.
Oh, no, there won't be any escaping if they have anything to say about it.
And now you'd better get for'ard to your hospital duties.
There must be a full ward waiting for you."
Wolf Larsen took the distribution of the whisky off my hands, and the bottles began to make their appearance while I worked over the fresh batch of wounded men in the forecastle.
I had seen whisky drunk, such as whisky-and-soda by the men of the clubs, but never as these men drank it, from pannikins and mugs, and from the bottles - great brimming drinks, each one of which was in itself a debauch.
But they did not stop at one or two.
They drank and drank, and ever the bottles slipped forward and they drank more.
Everybody drank; the wounded drank; Oofty-Oofty, who helped me, drank.
Only Louis refrained, no more than cautiously wetting his lips with the liquor, though he joined in the revels with an abandon equal to that of most of them.
It was a saturnalia.
In loud voices they shouted over the day's fighting, wrangled about details, or waxed affectionate and made friends with the men whom they had fought.
Prisoners and captors hiccoughed on one another's shoulders, and swore mighty oaths of respect and esteem.
They wept over the miseries of the past and over the miseries yet to come under the iron rule of Wolf Larsen.
And all cursed him and told terrible tales of his brutality.
It was a strange and frightful spectacle - the small, bunk-lined space, the floor and walls leaping and lurching, the dim light, the swaying shadows lengthening and fore-shortening monstrously, the thick air heavy with smoke and the smell of bodies and iodoform, and the inflamed faces of the men - half-men, I should call them.
I noted Oofty-Oofty, holding the end of a bandage and looking upon the scene, his velvety and luminous eyes glistening in the light like a deer's eyes, and yet I knew the barbaric devil that lurked in his breast and belied all the softness and tenderness, almost womanly, of his face and form.
And I noticed the boyish face of Harrison, - a good face once, but now a demon's, - convulsed with passion as he told the new-comers of the hell-ship they were in and shrieked curses upon the head of Wolf Larsen.
Wolf Larsen it was, always Wolf Larsen, enslaver and tormentor of men, a male Circe and these his swine, suffering brutes that grovelled before him and revolted only in drunkenness and in secrecy.
And was I, too, one of his swine?
I thought.
And Maud Brewster?
No!
I ground my teeth in my anger and determination till the man I was attending winced under my hand and Oofty-Oofty looked at me with curiosity.
I felt endowed with a sudden strength.
What of my new-found love, I was a giant.
I feared nothing.
I would work my will through it all, in spite of Wolf Larsen and of my own thirty-five bookish years.
All would be well.
I would make it well.
And so, exalted, upborne by a sense of power, I turned my back on the howling inferno and climbed to the deck, where the fog drifted ghostly through the night and the air was sweet and pure and quiet.
The steerage, where were two wounded hunters, was a repetition of the forecastle, except that Wolf Larsen was not being cursed; and it was with a great relief that I again emerged on deck and went aft to the cabin.
Supper was ready, and Wolf Larsen and Maud were waiting for me.
While all his ship was getting drunk as fast as it could, he remained sober.
Not a drop of liquor passed his lips.
He did not dare it under the circumstances, for he had only Louis and me to depend upon, and Louis was even now at the wheel.
We were sailing on through the fog without a look-out and without lights.
That Wolf Larsen had turned the liquor loose among his men surprised me, but he evidently knew their psychology and the best method of cementing in cordiality, what had begun in bloodshed.
His victory over Death Larsen seemed to have had a remarkable effect upon him.
The previous evening he had reasoned himself into the blues, and I had been waiting momentarily for one of his characteristic outbursts.
Yet nothing had occurred, and he was now in splendid trim.
Possibly his success in capturing so many hunters and boats had counteracted the customary reaction.
At any rate, the blues were gone, and the blue devils had not put in an appearance.
So I thought at the time; but, ah me, little I knew him or knew that even then, perhaps, he was meditating an outbreak more terrible than any I had seen.
As I say, he discovered himself in splendid trim when I entered the cabin.
He had had no headaches for weeks, his eyes were clear blue as the sky, his bronze was beautiful with perfect health; life swelled through his veins in full and magnificent flood.
While waiting for me he had engaged Maud in animated discussion.
Temptation was the topic they had hit upon, and from the few words I heard I made out that he was contending that temptation was temptation only when a man was seduced by it and fell.
"For look you," he was saying, "as I see it, a man does things because of desire.
He has many desires.
He may desire to escape pain, or to enjoy pleasure.
But whatever he does, he does because he desires to do it."
"But suppose he desires to do two opposite things, neither of which will permit him to do the other?"
Maud interrupted.
"The very thing I was coming to," he said.
"And between these two desires is just where the soul of the man is manifest," she went on.
"If it is a good soul, it will desire and do the good action, and the contrary if it is a bad soul.
It is the soul that decides."
"Bosh and nonsense!"
he exclaimed impatiently.
"It is the desire that decides.
Here is a man who wants to, say, get drunk.
Also, he doesn't want to get drunk.
What does he do?
How does he do it?
He is a puppet.
He is the creature of his desires, and of the two desires he obeys the strongest one, that is all.
His soul hasn't anything to do with it.
How can he be tempted to get drunk and refuse to get drunk?
If the desire to remain sober prevails, it is because it is the strongest desire.
Temptation plays no part, unless - " he paused while grasping the new thought which had come into his mind - "unless he is tempted to remain sober.
"Ha!
ha!"
he laughed.
"What do you think of that, Mr. Van Weyden?"
"That both of you are hair-splitting," I said.
"The man's soul is his desires.
Or, if you will, the sum of his desires is his soul.
Therein you are both wrong.
You lay the stress upon the desire apart from the soul, Miss Brewster lays the stress on the soul apart from the desire, and in point of fact soul and desire are the same thing.
"However," I continued, "Miss Brewster is right in contending that temptation is temptation whether the man yield or overcome.
Fire is fanned by the wind until it leaps up fiercely.
So is desire like fire.
It is fanned, as by a wind, by sight of the thing desired, or by a new and luring description or comprehension of the thing desired.
There lies the temptation.
It is the wind that fans the desire until it leaps up to mastery.
That's temptation.
It may not fan sufficiently to make the desire overmastering, but in so far as it fans at all, that far is it temptation.
And, as you say, it may tempt for good as well as for evil."
I felt proud of myself as we sat down to the table.
My words had been decisive.
At least they had put an end to the discussion.
But Wolf Larsen seemed voluble, prone to speech as I had never seen him before.
It was as though he were bursting with pent energy which must find an outlet somehow.
Almost immediately he launched into a discussion on love.
As usual, his was the sheer materialistic side, and Maud's was the idealistic.
For myself, beyond a word or so of suggestion or correction now and again, I took no part.
He was brilliant, but so was Maud, and for some time I lost the thread of the conversation through studying her face as she talked.
It was a face that rarely displayed colour, but to-night it was flushed and vivacious.
Her wit was playing keenly, and she was enjoying the tilt as much as Wolf Larsen, and he was enjoying it hugely.
For some reason, though I know not why in the argument, so utterly had I lost it in the contemplation of one stray brown lock of Maud's hair, he quoted from Iseult at Tintagel, where she says:
"Blessed am I beyond women even herein,
That beyond all born women is my sin,
And perfect my transgression."
As he had read pessimism into Omar, so now he read triumph, stinging triumph and exultation, into Swinburne's lines.
And he read rightly, and he read well.
He had hardly ceased reading when Louis put his head into the companion-way and whispered down:
"Be easy, will ye?
The fog's lifted, an' 'tis the port light iv a steamer that's crossin' our bow this blessed minute."
Wolf Larsen sprang on deck, and so swiftly that by the time we followed him he had pulled the steerage-slide over the drunken clamour and was on his way forward to close the forecastle-scuttle.
The fog, though it remained, had lifted high, where it obscured the stars and made the night quite black.
Directly ahead of us I could see a bright red light and a white light, and I could hear the pulsing of a steamer's engines.
Beyond a doubt it was the Macedonia.
Wolf Larsen had returned to the poop, and we stood in a silent group, watching the lights rapidly cross our bow.
"Lucky for me he doesn't carry a searchlight," Wolf Larsen said.
"What if I should cry out loudly?"
I queried in a whisper.
"It would be all up," he answered.
"But have you thought upon what would immediately happen?"
Before I had time to express any desire to know, he had me by the throat with his gorilla grip, and by a faint quiver of the muscles - a hint, as it were - he suggested to me the twist that would surely have broken my neck.
The next moment he had released me and we were gazing at the Macedonia's lights.
"What if I should cry out?"
Maud asked.
"I like you too well to hurt you," he said softly - nay, there was a tenderness and a caress in his voice that made me wince.
"But don't do it, just the same, for I'd promptly break Mr. Van Weyden's neck."
"Then she has my permission to cry out," I said defiantly.
"I hardly think you'll care to sacrifice the Dean of American Letters the Second," he sneered.
We spoke no more, though we had become too used to one another for the silence to be awkward; and when the red light and the white had disappeared we returned to the cabin to finish the interrupted supper.
Again they fell to quoting, and Maud gave Dowson's "Impenitentia Ultima."
She rendered it beautifully, but I watched not her, but Wolf Larsen.
I was fascinated by the fascinated look he bent upon Maud.
He was quite out of himself, and I noticed the unconscious movement of his lips as he shaped word for word as fast as she uttered them.
He interrupted her when she gave the lines:
"And her eyes should be my light while the sun went out behind me,
And the viols in her voice be the last sound in my ear."
"There are viols in your voice," he said bluntly, and his eyes flashed their golden light.
I could have shouted with joy at her control.
She finished the concluding stanza without faltering and then slowly guided the conversation into less perilous channels.
And all the while I sat in a half-daze, the drunken riot of the steerage breaking through the bulkhead, the man I feared and the woman I loved talking on and on.
The table was not cleared.
The man who had taken Mugridge's place had evidently joined his comrades in the forecastle.
If ever Wolf Larsen attained the summit of living, he attained it then.
From time to time I forsook my own thoughts to follow him, and I followed in amaze, mastered for the moment by his remarkable intellect, under the spell of his passion, for he was preaching the passion of revolt.
It was inevitable that Milton's Lucifer should be instanced, and the keenness with which Wolf Larsen analysed and depicted the character was a revelation of his stifled genius.
It reminded me of Taine, yet I knew the man had never heard of that brilliant though dangerous thinker.
"He led a lost cause, and he was not afraid of God's thunderbolts," Wolf Larsen was saying.
"Hurled into hell, he was unbeaten.
A third of God's angels he had led with him, and straightway he incited man to rebel against God, and gained for himself and hell the major portion of all the generations of man.
Why was he beaten out of heaven?
Because he was less brave than God?
less proud?
less aspiring?
No!
A thousand times no!
God was more powerful, as he said, Whom thunder hath made greater.
But Lucifer was a free spirit.
To serve was to suffocate.
He preferred suffering in freedom to all the happiness of a comfortable servility.
He did not care to serve God.
He cared to serve nothing.
He was no figure-head.
He stood on his own legs.
He was an individual."
"The first Anarchist," Maud laughed, rising and preparing to withdraw to her state-room.
"Then it is good to be an anarchist!"
he cried.
He, too, had risen, and he stood facing her, where she had paused at the door of her room, as he went on:
"'Here at least
We shall be free; the Almighty hath not built
Here for his envy; will not drive us hence;
Here we may reign secure; and in my choice
To reign is worth ambition, though in hell:
Better to reign in hell than serve in heaven."
It was the defiant cry of a mighty spirit.
The cabin still rang with his voice, as he stood there, swaying, his bronzed face shining, his head up and dominant, and his eyes, golden and masculine, intensely masculine and insistently soft, flashing upon Maud at the door.
Again that unnamable and unmistakable terror was in her eyes, and she said, almost in a whisper, "You are Lucifer."
The door closed and she was gone.
He stood staring after her for a minute, then returned to himself and to me.
"I'll relieve Louis at the wheel," he said shortly, "and call upon you to relieve at midnight.
Better turn in now and get some sleep."
He pulled on a pair of mittens, put on his cap, and ascended the companion-stairs, while I followed his suggestion by going to bed.
For some unknown reason, prompted mysteriously, I did not undress, but lay down fully clothed.
For a time I listened to the clamour in the steerage and marvelled upon the love which had come to me; but my sleep on the Ghost had become most healthful and natural, and soon the songs and cries died away, my eyes closed, and my consciousness sank down into the half-death of slumber.
I knew not what had aroused me, but I found myself out of my bunk, on my feet, wide awake, my soul vibrating to the warning of danger as it might have thrilled to a trumpet call.
I threw open the door.
The cabin light was burning low.
I saw Maud, my Maud, straining and struggling and crushed in the embrace of Wolf Larsen's arms.
I could see the vain beat and flutter of her as she strove, pressing her face against his breast, to escape from him.
All this I saw on the very instant of seeing and as I sprang forward.
I struck him with my fist, on the face, as he raised his head, but it was a puny blow.
He roared in a ferocious, animal-like way, and gave me a shove with his hand.
It was only a shove, a flirt of the wrist, yet so tremendous was his strength that I was hurled backward as from a catapult.
I struck the door of the state-room which had formerly been Mugridge's, splintering and smashing the panels with the impact of my body.
I struggled to my feet, with difficulty dragging myself clear of the wrecked door, unaware of any hurt whatever.
I was conscious only of an overmastering rage.
I think I, too, cried aloud, as I drew the knife at my hip and sprang forward a second time.
But something had happened.
They were reeling apart.
I was close upon him, my knife uplifted, but I withheld the blow.
I was puzzled by the strangeness of it.
Maud was leaning against the wall, one hand out for support; but he was staggering, his left hand pressed against his forehead and covering his eyes, and with the right he was groping about him in a dazed sort of way.
It struck against the wall, and his body seemed to express a muscular and physical relief at the contact, as though he had found his bearings, his location in space as well as something against which to lean.
Then I saw red again.
All my wrongs and humiliations flashed upon me with a dazzling brightness, all that I had suffered and others had suffered at his hands, all the enormity of the man's very existence.
I sprang upon him, blindly, insanely, and drove the knife into his shoulder.
I knew, then, that it was no more than a flesh wound, - I had felt the steel grate on his shoulder-blade, - and I raised the knife to strike at a more vital part.
But Maud had seen my first blow, and she cried, "Don't!
Please don't!"
I dropped my arm for a moment, and a moment only.
Again the knife was raised, and Wolf Larsen would have surely died had she not stepped between.
Her arms were around me, her hair was brushing my face.
My pulse rushed up in an unwonted manner, yet my rage mounted with it.
She looked me bravely in the eyes.
"For my sake," she begged.
"I would kill him for your sake!"
I cried, trying to free my arm without hurting her.
"Hush!"
she said, and laid her fingers lightly on my lips.
I could have kissed them, had I dared, even then, in my rage, the touch of them was so sweet, so very sweet.
"Please, please," she pleaded, and she disarmed me by the words, as I was to discover they would ever disarm me.
I stepped back, separating from her, and replaced the knife in its sheath.
I looked at Wolf Larsen.
He still pressed his left hand against his forehead.
It covered his eyes.
His head was bowed.
He seemed to have grown limp.
His body was sagging at the hips, his great shoulders were drooping and shrinking forward.
"Van, Weyden!"
he called hoarsely, and with a note of fright in his voice.
"Oh, Van Weyden!
where are you?"
I looked at Maud.
She did not speak, but nodded her head.
"Here I am," I answered, stepping to his side.
"What is the matter?"
"Help me to a seat," he said, in the same hoarse, frightened voice.
"I am a sick man; a very sick man, Hump," he said, as he left my sustaining grip and sank into a chair.
His head dropped forward on the table and was buried in his hands.
From time to time it rocked back and forward as with pain.
Once, when he half raised it, I saw the sweat standing in heavy drops on his forehead about the roots of his hair.
"I am a sick man, a very sick man," he repeated again, and yet once again.
"What is the matter?"
I asked, resting my hand on his shoulder.
"What can I do for you?"
But he shook my hand off with an irritated movement, and for a long time I stood by his side in silence.
Maud was looking on, her face awed and frightened.
What had happened to him we could not imagine.
"Hump," he said at last, "I must get into my bunk.
Lend me a hand.
I'll be all right in a little while.
It's those damn headaches, I believe.
I was afraid of them.
I had a feeling - no, I don't know what I'm talking about.
Help me into my bunk."
But when I got him into his bunk he again buried his face in his hands, covering his eyes, and as I turned to go I could hear him murmuring, "I am a sick man, a very sick man."
Maud looked at me inquiringly as I emerged.
I shook my head, saying:
"Something has happened to him.
What, I don't know.
He is helpless, and frightened, I imagine, for the first time in his life.
It must have occurred before he received the knife-thrust, which made only a superficial wound.
You must have seen what happened."
She shook her head.
"I saw nothing.
It is just as mysterious to me.
He suddenly released me and staggered away.
But what shall we do?
What shall I do?"
"If you will wait, please, until I come back," I answered.
I went on deck.
Louis was at the wheel.
"You may go for'ard and turn in," I said, taking it from him.
He was quick to obey, and I found myself alone on the deck of the Ghost.
As quietly as was possible, I clewed up the topsails, lowered the flying jib and staysail, backed the jib over, and flattened the mainsail.
Then I went below to Maud.
I placed my finger on my lips for silence, and entered Wolf Larsen's room.
He was in the same position in which I had left him, and his head was rocking - almost writhing - from side to side.
"Anything I can do for you?"
I asked.
He made no reply at first, but on my repeating the question he answered, "No, no; I'm all right.
Leave me alone till morning."
But as I turned to go I noted that his head had resumed its rocking motion.
Maud was waiting patiently for me, and I took notice, with a thrill of joy, of the queenly poise of her head and her glorious, calm eyes.
Calm and sure they were as her spirit itself.
"Will you trust yourself to me for a journey of six hundred miles or so?"
I asked.
"You mean - ?"
she asked, and I knew she had guessed aright.
"Yes, I mean just that," I replied.
"There is nothing left for us but the open boat."
"For me, you mean," she said.
"You are certainly as safe here as you have been."
"No, there is nothing left for us but the open boat," I iterated stoutly.
"Will you please dress as warmly as you can, at once, and make into a bundle whatever you wish to bring with you."
"And make all haste," I added, as she turned toward her state-room.
The lazarette was directly beneath the cabin, and, opening the trap-door in the floor and carrying a candle with me, I dropped down and began overhauling the ship's stores.
I selected mainly from the canned goods, and by the time I was ready, willing hands were extended from above to receive what I passed up.
We worked in silence.
I helped myself also to blankets, mittens, oilskins, caps, and such things, from the slop-chest.
It was no light adventure, this trusting ourselves in a small boat to so raw and stormy a sea, and it was imperative that we should guard ourselves against the cold and wet.
We worked feverishly at carrying our plunder on deck and depositing it amidships, so feverishly that Maud, whose strength was hardly a positive quantity, had to give over, exhausted, and sit on the steps at the break of the poop.
This did not serve to recover her, and she lay on her back, on the hard deck, arms stretched out, and whole body relaxed.
It was a trick I remembered of my sister, and I knew she would soon be herself again.
I knew, also, that weapons would not come in amiss, and I re-entered Wolf Larsen's state-room to get his rifle and shot-gun.
I spoke to him, but he made no answer, though his head was still rocking from side to side and he was not asleep.
"Good-bye, Lucifer," I whispered to myself as I softly closed the door.
Next to obtain was a stock of ammunition, - an easy matter, though I had to enter the steerage companion-way to do it.
Here the hunters stored the ammunition-boxes they carried in the boats, and here, but a few feet from their noisy revels, I took possession of two boxes.
Next, to lower a boat.
Not so simple a task for one man.
Having cast off the lashings, I hoisted first on the forward tackle, then on the aft, till the boat cleared the rail, when I lowered away, one tackle and then the other, for a couple of feet, till it hung snugly, above the water, against the schooner's side.
I made certain that it contained the proper equipment of oars, rowlocks, and sail.
Water was a consideration, and I robbed every boat aboard of its breaker.
As there were nine boats all told, it meant that we should have plenty of water, and ballast as well, though there was the chance that the boat would be overloaded, what of the generous supply of other things I was taking.
While Maud was passing me the provisions and I was storing them in the boat, a sailor came on deck from the forecastle.
He stood by the weather rail for a time (we were lowering over the lee rail), and then sauntered slowly amidships, where he again paused and stood facing the wind, with his back toward us.
I could hear my heart beating as I crouched low in the boat.
Maud had sunk down upon the deck and was, I knew, lying motionless, her body in the shadow of the bulwark.
But the man never turned, and, after stretching his arms above his head and yawning audibly, he retraced his steps to the forecastle scuttle and disappeared.
A few minutes sufficed to finish the loading, and I lowered the boat into the water.
As I helped Maud over the rail and felt her form close to mine, it was all I could do to keep from crying out, "I love you!
I love you!"
Truly Humphrey Van Weyden was at last in love, I thought, as her fingers clung to mine while I lowered her down to the boat.
I held on to the rail with one hand and supported her weight with the other, and I was proud at the moment of the feat.
It was a strength I had not possessed a few months before, on the day I said good-bye to Charley Furuseth and started for San Francisco on the ill-fated Martinez.
As the boat ascended on a sea, her feet touched and I released her hands.
I cast off the tackles and leaped after her.
I had never rowed in my life, but I put out the oars and at the expense of much effort got the boat clear of the Ghost.
Then I experimented with the sail.
I had seen the boat-steerers and hunters set their spritsails many times, yet this was my first attempt.
What took them possibly two minutes took me twenty, but in the end I succeeded in setting and trimming it, and with the steering-oar in my hands hauled on the wind.
"There lies Japan," I remarked, "straight before us."
"Humphrey Van Weyden," she said, "you are a brave man."
"Nay," I answered, "it is you who are a brave woman."
We turned our heads, swayed by a common impulse to see the last of the Ghost.
Her low hull lifted and rolled to windward on a sea; her canvas loomed darkly in the night; her lashed wheel creaked as the rudder kicked; then sight and sound of her faded away, and we were alone on the dark sea.
Day broke, grey and chill.
The boat was close-hauled on a fresh breeze and the compass indicated that we were just making the course which would bring us to Japan.
Though stoutly mittened, my fingers were cold, and they pained from the grip on the steering-oar.
My feet were stinging from the bite of the frost, and I hoped fervently that the sun would shine.
Before me, in the bottom of the boat, lay Maud.
She, at least, was warm, for under her and over her were thick blankets.
The top one I had drawn over her face to shelter it from the night, so I could see nothing but the vague shape of her, and her light-brown hair, escaped from the covering and jewelled with moisture from the air.
Long I looked at her, dwelling upon that one visible bit of her as only a man would who deemed it the most precious thing in the world.
So insistent was my gaze that at last she stirred under the blankets, the top fold was thrown back and she smiled out on me, her eyes yet heavy with sleep.
"Good-morning, Mr. Van Weyden," she said.
"Have you sighted land yet?"
"No," I answered, "but we are approaching it at a rate of six miles an hour."
She made a mouè of disappointment.
"But that is equivalent to one hundred and forty-four miles in twenty-four hours," I added reassuringly.
Her face brightened.
"And how far have we to go?"
"Siberia lies off there," I said, pointing to the west.
"But to the south-west, some six hundred miles, is Japan.
If this wind should hold, we'll make it in five days."
"And if it storms?
The boat could not live?"
She had a way of looking one in the eyes and demanding the truth, and thus she looked at me as she asked the question.
"It would have to storm very hard," I temporized.
"And if it storms very hard?"
I nodded my head.
"But we may be picked up any moment by a sealing-schooner.
They are plentifully distributed over this part of the ocean."
"Why, you are chilled through!"
she cried.
"Look!
You are shivering.
Don't deny it; you are.
And here I have been lying warm as toast."
"I don't see that it would help matters if you, too, sat up and were chilled," I laughed.
"It will, though, when I learn to steer, which I certainly shall."
She sat up and began making her simple toilet.
She shook down her hair, and it fell about her in a brown cloud, hiding her face and shoulders.
Dear, damp brown hair!
I wanted to kiss it, to ripple it through my fingers, to bury my face in it.
I gazed entranced, till the boat ran into the wind and the flapping sail warned me I was not attending to my duties.
Idealist and romanticist that I was and always had been in spite of my analytical nature, yet I had failed till now in grasping much of the physical characteristics of love.
The love of man and woman, I had always held, was a sublimated something related to spirit, a spiritual bond that linked and drew their souls together.
The bonds of the flesh had little part in my cosmos of love.
But I was learning the sweet lesson for myself that the soul transmuted itself, expressed itself, through the flesh; that the sight and sense and touch of the loved one's hair was as much breath and voice and essence of the spirit as the light that shone from the eyes and the thoughts that fell from the lips.
After all, pure spirit was unknowable, a thing to be sensed and divined only; nor could it express itself in terms of itself.
Jehovah was anthropomorphic because he could address himself to the Jews only in terms of their understanding; so he was conceived as in their own image, as a cloud, a pillar of fire, a tangible, physical something which the mind of the Israelites could grasp.
And so I gazed upon Maud's light-brown hair, and loved it, and learned more of love than all the poets and singers had taught me with all their songs and sonnets.
She flung it back with a sudden adroit movement, and her face emerged, smiling.
"Why don't women wear their hair down always?"
I asked.
"It is so much more beautiful."
"If it didn't tangle so dreadfully," she laughed.
"There!
I've lost one of my precious hair-pins!"
I neglected the boat and had the sail spilling the wind again and again, such was my delight in following her every movement as she searched through the blankets for the pin.
I was surprised, and joyfully, that she was so much the woman, and the display of each trait and mannerism that was characteristically feminine gave me keener joy.
For I had been elevating her too highly in my concepts of her, removing her too far from the plane of the human, and too far from me.
I had been making of her a creature goddess-like and unapproachable.
So I hailed with delight the little traits that proclaimed her only woman after all, such as the toss of the head which flung back the cloud of hair, and the search for the pin.
She was woman, my kind, on my plane, and the delightful intimacy of kind, of man and woman, was possible, as well as the reverence and awe in which I knew I should always hold her.
She found the pin with an adorable little cry, and I turned my attention more fully to my steering.
I proceeded to experiment, lashing and wedging the steering-oar until the boat held on fairly well by the wind without my assistance.
Occasionally it came up too close, or fell off too freely; but it always recovered itself and in the main behaved satisfactorily.
"And now we shall have breakfast," I said.
"But first you must be more warmly clad."
I got out a heavy shirt, new from the slop-chest and made from blanket goods.
I knew the kind, so thick and so close of texture that it could resist the rain and not be soaked through after hours of wetting.
When she had slipped this on over her head, I exchanged the boy's cap she wore for a man's cap, large enough to cover her hair, and, when the flap was turned down, to completely cover her neck and ears.
The effect was charming.
Her face was of the sort that cannot but look well under all circumstances.
Nothing could destroy its exquisite oval, its well-nigh classic lines, its delicately stencilled brows, its large brown eyes, clear-seeing and calm, gloriously calm.
A puff, slightly stronger than usual, struck us just then.
The boat was caught as it obliquely crossed the crest of a wave.
It went over suddenly, burying its gunwale level with the sea and shipping a bucketful or so of water.
I was opening a can of tongue at the moment, and I sprang to the sheet and cast it off just in time.
The sail flapped and fluttered, and the boat paid off.
A few minutes of regulating sufficed to put it on its course again, when I returned to the preparation of breakfast.
"It does very well, it seems, though I am not versed in things nautical," she said, nodding her head with grave approval at my steering contrivance.
"But it will serve only when we are sailing by the wind," I explained.
"When running more freely, with the wind astern abeam, or on the quarter, it will be necessary for me to steer."
"I must say I don't understand your technicalities," she said, "but I do your conclusion, and I don't like it.
You cannot steer night and day and for ever.
So I shall expect, after breakfast, to receive my first lesson.
And then you shall lie down and sleep.
We'll stand watches just as they do on ships."
"I don't see how I am to teach you," I made protest.
"I am just learning for myself.
You little thought when you trusted yourself to me that I had had no experience whatever with small boats.
This is the first time I have ever been in one."
"Then we'll learn together, sir.
And since you've had a night's start you shall teach me what you have learned.
And now, breakfast.
My!
this air does give one an appetite!"
"No coffee," I said regretfully, passing her buttered sea-biscuits and a slice of canned tongue.
"And there will be no tea, no soups, nothing hot, till we have made land somewhere, somehow."
After the simple breakfast, capped with a cup of cold water, Maud took her lesson in steering.
In teaching her I learned quite a deal myself, though I was applying the knowledge already acquired by sailing the Ghost and by watching the boat-steerers sail the small boats.
She was an apt pupil, and soon learned to keep the course, to luff in the puffs and to cast off the sheet in an emergency.
Having grown tired, apparently, of the task, she relinquished the oar to me.
I had folded up the blankets, but she now proceeded to spread them out on the bottom.
When all was arranged snugly, she said:
"Now, sir, to bed.
And you shall sleep until luncheon.
Till dinner-time," she corrected, remembering the arrangement on the Ghost.
What could I do?
She insisted, and said, "Please, please," whereupon I turned the oar over to her and obeyed.
I experienced a positive sensuous delight as I crawled into the bed she had made with her hands.
The calm and control which were so much a part of her seemed to have been communicated to the blankets, so that I was aware of a soft dreaminess and content, and of an oval face and brown eyes framed in a fisherman's cap and tossing against a background now of grey cloud, now of grey sea, and then I was aware that I had been asleep.
I looked at my watch.
It was one o'clock.
I had slept seven hours!
And she had been steering seven hours!
When I took the steering-oar I had first to unbend her cramped fingers.
Her modicum of strength had been exhausted, and she was unable even to move from her position.
I was compelled to let go the sheet while I helped her to the nest of blankets and chafed her hands and arms.
"I am so tired," she said, with a quick intake of the breath and a sigh, drooping her head wearily.
But she straightened it the next moment.
"Now don't scold, don't you dare scold," she cried with mock defiance.
"I hope my face does not appear angry," I answered seriously; "for I assure you I am not in the least angry."
"N-no," she considered.
"It looks only reproachful."
"Then it is an honest face, for it looks what I feel.
You were not fair to yourself, nor to me.
How can I ever trust you again?"
She looked penitent.
"I'll be good," she said, as a naughty child might say it.
"I promise - "
"To obey as a sailor would obey his captain?"
"Yes," she answered.
"It was stupid of me, I know."
"Then you must promise something else," I ventured.
"Readily."
"That you will not say, 'Please, please,' too often; for when you do you are sure to override my authority."
She laughed with amused appreciation.
She, too, had noticed the power of the repeated "please."
"It is a good word - " I began.
"But I must not overwork it," she broke in.
But she laughed weakly, and her head drooped again.
I left the oar long enough to tuck the blankets about her feet and to pull a single fold across her face.
Alas!
she was not strong.
I looked with misgiving toward the south-west and thought of the six hundred miles of hardship before us - ay, if it were no worse than hardship.
On this sea a storm might blow up at any moment and destroy us.
And yet I was unafraid.
I was without confidence in the future, extremely doubtful, and yet I felt no underlying fear.
It must come right, it must come right, I repeated to myself, over and over again.
The wind freshened in the afternoon, raising a stiffer sea and trying the boat and me severely.
But the supply of food and the nine breakers of water enabled the boat to stand up to the sea and wind, and I held on as long as I dared.
Then I removed the sprit, tightly hauling down the peak of the sail, and we raced along under what sailors call a leg-of-mutton.
Late in the afternoon I sighted a steamer's smoke on the horizon to leeward, and I knew it either for a Russian cruiser, or, more likely, the Macedonia still seeking the Ghost.
The sun had not shone all day, and it had been bitter cold.
As night drew on, the clouds darkened and the wind freshened, so that when Maud and I ate supper it was with our mittens on and with me still steering and eating morsels between puffs.
By the time it was dark, wind and sea had become too strong for the boat, and I reluctantly took in the sail and set about making a drag or sea-anchor.
I had learned of the device from the talk of the hunters, and it was a simple thing to manufacture.
Furling the sail and lashing it securely about the mast, boom, sprit, and two pairs of spare oars, I threw it overboard.
A line connected it with the bow, and as it floated low in the water, practically unexposed to the wind, it drifted less rapidly than the boat.
In consequence it held the boat bow on to the sea and wind - the safest position in which to escape being swamped when the sea is breaking into whitecaps.
"And now?"
Maud asked cheerfully, when the task was accomplished and I pulled on my mittens.
"And now we are no longer travelling toward Japan," I answered.
"Our drift is to the south-east, or south-south-east, at the rate of at least two miles an hour."
"That will be only twenty-four miles," she urged, "if the wind remains high all night."
"Yes, and only one hundred and forty miles if it continues for three days and nights."
"But it won't continue," she said with easy confidence.
"It will turn around and blow fair."
"The sea is the great faithless one."
"But the wind!"
she retorted.
"I have heard you grow eloquent over the brave trade-wind."
"I wish I had thought to bring Wolf Larsen's chronometer and sextant," I said, still gloomily.
"Sailing one direction, drifting another direction, to say nothing of the set of the current in some third direction, makes a resultant which dead reckoning can never calculate.
Before long we won't know where we are by five hundred miles."
Then I begged her pardon and promised I should not be disheartened any more.
At her solicitation I let her take the watch till midnight, - it was then nine o'clock, but I wrapped her in blankets and put an oilskin about her before I lay down.
I slept only cat-naps.
The boat was leaping and pounding as it fell over the crests, I could hear the seas rushing past, and spray was continually being thrown aboard.
And still, it was not a bad night, I mused - nothing to the nights I had been through on the Ghost; nothing, perhaps, to the nights we should go through in this cockle-shell.
Its planking was three-quarters of an inch thick.
Between us and the bottom of the sea was less than an inch of wood.
And yet, I aver it, and I aver it again, I was unafraid.
The death which Wolf Larsen and even Thomas Mugridge had made me fear, I no longer feared.
The coming of Maud Brewster into my life seemed to have transformed me.
After all, I thought, it is better and finer to love than to be loved, if it makes something in life so worth while that one is not loath to die for it.
I forget my own life in the love of another life; and yet, such is the paradox, I never wanted so much to live as right now when I place the least value upon my own life.
I never had so much reason for living, was my concluding thought; and after that, until I dozed, I contented myself with trying to pierce the darkness to where I knew Maud crouched low in the stern-sheets, watchful of the foaming sea and ready to call me on an instant's notice.
There is no need of going into an extended recital of our suffering in the small boat during the many days we were driven and drifted, here and there, willy-nilly, across the ocean.
The high wind blew from the north-west for twenty-four hours, when it fell calm, and in the night sprang up from the south-west.
This was dead in our teeth, but I took in the sea-anchor and set sail, hauling a course on the wind which took us in a south-south-easterly direction.
It was an even choice between this and the west-north-westerly course which the wind permitted; but the warm airs of the south fanned my desire for a warmer sea and swayed my decision.
In three hours - it was midnight, I well remember, and as dark as I had ever seen it on the sea - the wind, still blowing out of the south-west, rose furiously, and once again I was compelled to set the sea-anchor.
Day broke and found me wan-eyed and the ocean lashed white, the boat pitching, almost on end, to its drag.
We were in imminent danger of being swamped by the whitecaps.
As it was, spray and spume came aboard in such quantities that I bailed without cessation.
The blankets were soaking.
Everything was wet except Maud, and she, in oilskins, rubber boots, and sou'wester, was dry, all but her face and hands and a stray wisp of hair.
She relieved me at the bailing-hole from time to time, and bravely she threw out the water and faced the storm.
All things are relative.
It was no more than a stiff blow, but to us, fighting for life in our frail craft, it was indeed a storm.
Cold and cheerless, the wind beating on our faces, the white seas roaring by, we struggled through the day.
Night came, but neither of us slept.
Day came, and still the wind beat on our faces and the white seas roared past.
By the second night Maud was falling asleep from exhaustion.
I covered her with oilskins and a tarpaulin.
She was comparatively dry, but she was numb with the cold.
I feared greatly that she might die in the night; but day broke, cold and cheerless, with the same clouded sky and beating wind and roaring seas.
I had had no sleep for forty-eight hours.
I was wet and chilled to the marrow, till I felt more dead than alive.
My body was stiff from exertion as well as from cold, and my aching muscles gave me the severest torture whenever I used them, and I used them continually.
And all the time we were being driven off into the north-east, directly away from Japan and toward bleak Bering Sea.
And still we lived, and the boat lived, and the wind blew unabated.
In fact, toward nightfall of the third day it increased a trifle and something more.
The boat's bow plunged under a crest, and we came through quarter-full of water.
I bailed like a madman.
The liability of shipping another such sea was enormously increased by the water that weighed the boat down and robbed it of its buoyancy.
And another such sea meant the end.
When I had the boat empty again I was forced to take away the tarpaulin which covered Maud, in order that I might lash it down across the bow.
It was well I did, for it covered the boat fully a third of the way aft, and three times, in the next several hours, it flung off the bulk of the down-rushing water when the bow shoved under the seas.
Maud's condition was pitiable.
She sat crouched in the bottom of the boat, her lips blue, her face grey and plainly showing the pain she suffered.
But ever her eyes looked bravely at me, and ever her lips uttered brave words.
The worst of the storm must have blown that night, though little I noticed it.
I had succumbed and slept where I sat in the stern-sheets.
The morning of the fourth day found the wind diminished to a gentle whisper, the sea dying down and the sun shining upon us.
Oh, the blessed sun!
How we bathed our poor bodies in its delicious warmth, reviving like bugs and crawling things after a storm.
We smiled again, said amusing things, and waxed optimistic over our situation.
Yet it was, if anything, worse than ever.
We were farther from Japan than the night we left the Ghost.
Nor could I more than roughly guess our latitude and longitude.
At a calculation of a two-mile drift per hour, during the seventy and odd hours of the storm, we had been driven at least one hundred and fifty miles to the north-east.
But was such calculated drift correct?
For all I knew, it might have been four miles per hour instead of two.
In which case we were another hundred and fifty miles to the bad.
Where we were I did not know, though there was quite a likelihood that we were in the vicinity of the Ghost.
There were seals about us, and I was prepared to sight a sealing-schooner at any time.
We did sight one, in the afternoon, when the north-west breeze had sprung up freshly once more.
But the strange schooner lost itself on the sky-line and we alone occupied the circle of the sea.
Came days of fog, when even Maud's spirit drooped and there were no merry words upon her lips; days of calm, when we floated on the lonely immensity of sea, oppressed by its greatness and yet marvelling at the miracle of tiny life, for we still lived and struggled to live; days of sleet and wind and snow-squalls, when nothing could keep us warm; or days of drizzling rain, when we filled our water-breakers from the drip of the wet sail.
And ever I loved Maud with an increasing love.
She was so many-sided, so many-mooded - "protean-mooded" I called her.
But I called her this, and other and dearer things, in my thoughts only.
Though the declaration of my love urged and trembled on my tongue a thousand times, I knew that it was no time for such a declaration.
If for no other reason, it was no time, when one was protecting and trying to save a woman, to ask that woman for her love.
Delicate as was the situation, not alone in this but in other ways, I flattered myself that I was able to deal delicately with it; and also I flattered myself that by look or sign I gave no advertisement of the love I felt for her.
We were like good comrades, and we grew better comrades as the days went by.
One thing about her which surprised me was her lack of timidity and fear.
The terrible sea, the frail boat, the storms, the suffering, the strangeness and isolation of the situation, - all that should have frightened a robust woman, - seemed to make no impression upon her who had known life only in its most sheltered and consummately artificial aspects, and who was herself all fire and dew and mist, sublimated spirit, all that was soft and tender and clinging in woman.
And yet I am wrong.
She was timid and afraid, but she possessed courage.
The flesh and the qualms of the flesh she was heir to, but the flesh bore heavily only on the flesh.
And she was spirit, first and always spirit, etherealized essence of life, calm as her calm eyes, and sure of permanence in the changing order of the universe.
Came days of storm, days and nights of storm, when the ocean menaced us with its roaring whiteness, and the wind smote our struggling boat with a Titan's buffets.
And ever we were flung off, farther and farther, to the north-east.
It was in such a storm, and the worst that we had experienced, that I cast a weary glance to leeward, not in quest of anything, but more from the weariness of facing the elemental strife, and in mute appeal, almost, to the wrathful powers to cease and let us be.
What I saw I could not at first believe.
Days and nights of sleeplessness and anxiety had doubtless turned my head.
I looked back at Maud, to identify myself, as it were, in time and space.
The sight of her dear wet cheeks, her flying hair, and her brave brown eyes convinced me that my vision was still healthy.
Again I turned my face to leeward, and again I saw the jutting promontory, black and high and naked, the raging surf that broke about its base and beat its front high up with spouting fountains, the black and forbidden coast-line running toward the south-east and fringed with a tremendous scarf of white.
"Maud," I said.
"Maud."
She turned her head and beheld the sight.
"It cannot be Alaska!"
she cried.
"Alas, no," I answered, and asked, "Can you swim?"
She shook her head.
"Neither can I," I said.
"So we must get ashore without swimming, in some opening between the rocks through which we can drive the boat and clamber out.
But we must be quick, most quick - and sure."
I spoke with a confidence she knew I did not feel, for she looked at me with that unfaltering gaze of hers and said:
"I have not thanked you yet for all you have done for me but - "
She hesitated, as if in doubt how best to word her gratitude.
"Well?"
I said, brutally, for I was not quite pleased with her thanking me.
"You might help me," she smiled.
"To acknowledge your obligations before you die?
Not at all.
We are not going to die.
We shall land on that island, and we shall be snug and sheltered before the day is done."
I spoke stoutly, but I did not believe a word.
Nor was I prompted to lie through fear.
I felt no fear, though I was sure of death in that boiling surge amongst the rocks which was rapidly growing nearer.
It was impossible to hoist sail and claw off that shore.
The wind would instantly capsize the boat; the seas would swamp it the moment it fell into the trough; and, besides, the sail, lashed to the spare oars, dragged in the sea ahead of us.
As I say, I was not afraid to meet my own death, there, a few hundred yards to leeward; but I was appalled at the thought that Maud must die.
My cursed imagination saw her beaten and mangled against the rocks, and it was too terrible.
I strove to compel myself to think we would make the landing safely, and so I spoke, not what I believed, but what I preferred to believe.
I recoiled before contemplation of that frightful death, and for a moment I entertained the wild idea of seizing Maud in my arms and leaping overboard.
Then I resolved to wait, and at the last moment, when we entered on the final stretch, to take her in my arms and proclaim my love, and, with her in my embrace, to make the desperate struggle and die.
Instinctively we drew closer together in the bottom of the boat.
I felt her mittened hand come out to mine.
And thus, without speech, we waited the end.
We were not far off the line the wind made with the western edge of the promontory, and I watched in the hope that some set of the current or send of the sea would drift us past before we reached the surf.
"We shall go clear," I said, with a confidence which I knew deceived neither of us.
"By God, we will go clear!"
I cried, five minutes later.
The oath left my lips in my excitement - the first, I do believe, in my life, unless "trouble it," an expletive of my youth, be accounted an oath.
"I beg your pardon," I said.
"You have convinced me of your sincerity," she said, with a faint smile.
"I do know, now, that we shall go clear."
I had seen a distant headland past the extreme edge of the promontory, and as we looked we could see grow the intervening coastline of what was evidently a deep cove.
At the same time there broke upon our ears a continuous and mighty bellowing.
It partook of the magnitude and volume of distant thunder, and it came to us directly from leeward, rising above the crash of the surf and travelling directly in the teeth of the storm.
As we passed the point the whole cove burst upon our view, a half-moon of white sandy beach upon which broke a huge surf, and which was covered with myriads of seals.
It was from them that the great bellowing went up.
"A rookery!"
I cried.
"Now are we indeed saved.
There must be men and cruisers to protect them from the seal-hunters.
Possibly there is a station ashore."
But as I studied the surf which beat upon the beach, I said, "Still bad, but not so bad.
And now, if the gods be truly kind, we shall drift by that next headland and come upon a perfectly sheltered beach, where we may land without wetting our feet."
And the gods were kind.
The first and second headlands were directly in line with the south-west wind; but once around the second, - and we went perilously near, - we picked up the third headland, still in line with the wind and with the other two.
But the cove that intervened!
It penetrated deep into the land, and the tide, setting in, drifted us under the shelter of the point.
Here the sea was calm, save for a heavy but smooth ground-swell, and I took in the sea-anchor and began to row.
From the point the shore curved away, more and more to the south and west, until at last it disclosed a cove within the cove, a little land-locked harbour, the water level as a pond, broken only by tiny ripples where vagrant breaths and wisps of the storm hurtled down from over the frowning wall of rock that backed the beach a hundred feet inshore.
Here were no seals whatever.
The boat's stern touched the hard shingle.
I sprang out, extending my hand to Maud.
The next moment she was beside me.
As my fingers released hers, she clutched for my arm hastily.
At the same moment I swayed, as about to fall to the sand.
This was the startling effect of the cessation of motion.
We had been so long upon the moving, rocking sea that the stable land was a shock to us.
We expected the beach to lift up this way and that, and the rocky walls to swing back and forth like the sides of a ship; and when we braced ourselves, automatically, for these various expected movements, their non-occurrence quite overcame our equilibrium.
"I really must sit down," Maud said, with a nervous laugh and a dizzy gesture, and forthwith she sat down on the sand.
I attended to making the boat secure and joined her.
Thus we landed on Endeavour Island, as we came to it, land-sick from long custom of the sea.
"Fool!"
I cried aloud in my vexation.
I had unloaded the boat and carried its contents high up on the beach, where I had set about making a camp.
There was driftwood, though not much, on the beach, and the sight of a coffee tin I had taken from the Ghost's larder had given me the idea of a fire.
"Blithering idiot!"
I was continuing.
But Maud said, "Tut, tut," in gentle reproval, and then asked why I was a blithering idiot.
"No matches," I groaned.
"Not a match did I bring.
And now we shall have no hot coffee, soup, tea, or anything!"
"Wasn't it - er - Crusoe who rubbed sticks together?"
she drawled.
"But I have read the personal narratives of a score of shipwrecked men who tried, and tried in vain," I answered.
"I remember Winters, a newspaper fellow with an Alaskan and Siberian reputation.
Met him at the Bibelot once, and he was telling us how he attempted to make a fire with a couple of sticks.
It was most amusing.
He told it inimitably, but it was the story of a failure.
I remember his conclusion, his black eyes flashing as he said, 'Gentlemen, the South Sea Islander may do it, the Malay may do it, but take my word it's beyond the white man.'"
"Oh, well, we've managed so far without it," she said cheerfully.
"And there's no reason why we cannot still manage without it."
"But think of the coffee!"
I cried.
"It's good coffee, too, I know.
I took it from Larsen's private stores.
And look at that good wood."
I confess, I wanted the coffee badly; and I learned, not long afterward, that the berry was likewise a little weakness of Maud's.
Besides, we had been so long on a cold diet that we were numb inside as well as out.
Anything warm would have been most gratifying.
But I complained no more and set about making a tent of the sail for Maud.
I had looked upon it as a simple task, what of the oars, mast, boom, and sprit, to say nothing of plenty of lines.
But as I was without experience, and as every detail was an experiment and every successful detail an invention, the day was well gone before her shelter was an accomplished fact.
And then, that night, it rained, and she was flooded out and driven back into the boat.
The next morning I dug a shallow ditch around the tent, and, an hour later, a sudden gust of wind, whipping over the rocky wall behind us, picked up the tent and smashed it down on the sand thirty yards away.
Maud laughed at my crestfallen expression, and I said, "As soon as the wind abates I intend going in the boat to explore the island.
There must be a station somewhere, and men.
And ships must visit the station.
Some Government must protect all these seals.
But I wish to have you comfortable before I start."
"I should like to go with you," was all she said.
"It would be better if you remained.
You have had enough of hardship.
It is a miracle that you have survived.
And it won't be comfortable in the boat rowing and sailing in this rainy weather.
What you need is rest, and I should like you to remain and get it."
Something suspiciously akin to moistness dimmed her beautiful eyes before she dropped them and partly turned away her head.
"I should prefer going with you," she said in a low voice, in which there was just a hint of appeal.
"I might be able to help you a - " her voice broke, - "a little.
And if anything should happen to you, think of me left here alone."
"Oh, I intend being very careful," I answered.
"And I shall not go so far but what I can get back before night.
Yes, all said and done, I think it vastly better for you to remain, and sleep, and rest and do nothing."
She turned and looked me in the eyes.
Her gaze was unfaltering, but soft.
"Please, please," she said, oh, so softly.
I stiffened myself to refuse, and shook my head.
Still she waited and looked at me.
I tried to word my refusal, but wavered.
I saw the glad light spring into her eyes and knew that I had lost.
It was impossible to say no after that.
The wind died down in the afternoon, and we were prepared to start the following morning.
There was no way of penetrating the island from our cove, for the walls rose perpendicularly from the beach, and, on either side of the cove, rose from the deep water.
Morning broke dull and grey, but calm, and I was awake early and had the boat in readiness.
"Fool!
Imbecile!
Yahoo!"
I shouted, when I thought it was meet to arouse Maud; but this time I shouted in merriment as I danced about the beach, bareheaded, in mock despair.
Her head appeared under the flap of the sail.
"What now?"
she asked sleepily, and, withal, curiously.
"Coffee!"
I cried.
"What do you say to a cup of coffee?
hot coffee?
piping hot?"
"My!"
she murmured, "you startled me, and you are cruel.
Here I have been composing my soul to do without it, and here you are vexing me with your vain suggestions."
"Watch me," I said.
From under clefts among the rocks I gathered a few dry sticks and chips.
These I whittled into shavings or split into kindling.
From my note-book I tore out a page, and from the ammunition box took a shot-gun shell.
Removing the wads from the latter with my knife, I emptied the powder on a flat rock.
Next I pried the primer, or cap, from the shell, and laid it on the rock, in the midst of the scattered powder.
All was ready.
Maud still watched from the tent.
Holding the paper in my left hand, I smashed down upon the cap with a rock held in my right.
There was a puff of white smoke, a burst of flame, and the rough edge of the paper was alight.
Maud clapped her hands gleefully.
"Prometheus!"
she cried.
But I was too occupied to acknowledge her delight.
The feeble flame must be cherished tenderly if it were to gather strength and live.
I fed it, shaving by shaving, and sliver by sliver, till at last it was snapping and crackling as it laid hold of the smaller chips and sticks.
To be cast away on an island had not entered into my calculations, so we were without a kettle or cooking utensils of any sort; but I made shift with the tin used for bailing the boat, and later, as we consumed our supply of canned goods, we accumulated quite an imposing array of cooking vessels.
I boiled the water, but it was Maud who made the coffee.
And how good it was!
My contribution was canned beef fried with crumbled sea-biscuit and water.
The breakfast was a success, and we sat about the fire much longer than enterprising explorers should have done, sipping the hot black coffee and talking over our situation.
I was confident that we should find a station in some one of the coves, for I knew that the rookeries of Bering Sea were thus guarded; but Maud advanced the theory - to prepare me for disappointment, I do believe, if disappointment were to come - that we had discovered an unknown rookery.
She was in very good spirits, however, and made quite merry in accepting our plight as a grave one.
"If you are right," I said, "then we must prepare to winter here.
Our food will not last, but there are the seals.
They go away in the fall, so I must soon begin to lay in a supply of meat.
Then there will be huts to build and driftwood to gather.
Also we shall try out seal fat for lighting purposes.
Altogether, we'll have our hands full if we find the island uninhabited.
Which we shall not, I know."
But she was right.
We sailed with a beam wind along the shore, searching the coves with our glasses and landing occasionally, without finding a sign of human life.
Yet we learned that we were not the first who had landed on Endeavour Island.
High up on the beach of the second cove from ours, we discovered the splintered wreck of a boat - a sealer's boat, for the rowlocks were bound in sennit, a gun-rack was on the starboard side of the bow, and in white letters was faintly visible Gazelle No.
2.
The boat had lain there for a long time, for it was half filled with sand, and the splintered wood had that weather-worn appearance due to long exposure to the elements.
In the stern-sheets I found a rusty ten-gauge shot-gun and a sailor's sheath-knife broken short across and so rusted as to be almost unrecognizable.
"They got away," I said cheerfully; but I felt a sinking at the heart and seemed to divine the presence of bleached bones somewhere on that beach.
I did not wish Maud's spirits to be dampened by such a find, so I turned seaward again with our boat and skirted the north-eastern point of the island.
There were no beaches on the southern shore, and by early afternoon we rounded the black promontory and completed the circumnavigation of the island.
I estimated its circumference at twenty-five miles, its width as varying from two to five miles; while my most conservative calculation placed on its beaches two hundred thousand seals.
The island was highest at its extreme south-western point, the headlands and backbone diminishing regularly until the north-eastern portion was only a few feet above the sea.
With the exception of our little cove, the other beaches sloped gently back for a distance of half-a-mile or so, into what I might call rocky meadows, with here and there patches of moss and tundra grass.
Here the seals hauled out, and the old bulls guarded their harems, while the young bulls hauled out by themselves.
This brief description is all that Endeavour Island merits.
Damp and soggy where it was not sharp and rocky, buffeted by storm winds and lashed by the sea, with the air continually a-tremble with the bellowing of two hundred thousand amphibians, it was a melancholy and miserable sojourning-place.
Maud, who had prepared me for disappointment, and who had been sprightly and vivacious all day, broke down as we landed in our own little cove.
She strove bravely to hide it from me, but while I was kindling another fire I knew she was stifling her sobs in the blankets under the sail-tent.
It was my turn to be cheerful, and I played the part to the best of my ability, and with such success that I brought the laughter back into her dear eyes and song on her lips; for she sang to me before she went to an early bed.
It was the first time I had heard her sing, and I lay by the fire, listening and transported, for she was nothing if not an artist in everything she did, and her voice, though not strong, was wonderfully sweet and expressive.
I still slept in the boat, and I lay awake long that night, gazing up at the first stars I had seen in many nights and pondering the situation.  
Responsibility of this sort was a new thing to me.  
Wolf Larsen had been quite right.  
I had stood on my father’s legs.  
My lawyers and agents had taken care of my money for me.  
I had had no responsibilities at all.  
Then, on the Ghost I had learned to be responsible for myself.  
And now, for the first time in my life, I found myself responsible for some one else.  
And it was required of me that this should be the gravest of responsibilities, for she was the one woman in the world - the one small woman, as I loved to think of her.
No wonder we called it Endeavour Island.
For two weeks we toiled at building a hut.
Maud insisted on helping, and I could have wept over her bruised and bleeding hands.
And still, I was proud of her because of it.
There was something heroic about this gently-bred woman enduring our terrible hardship and with her pittance of strength bending to the tasks of a peasant woman.
She gathered many of the stones which I built into the walls of the hut; also, she turned a deaf ear to my entreaties when I begged her to desist.
She compromised, however, by taking upon herself the lighter labours of cooking and gathering driftwood and moss for our winter's supply.
The hut's walls rose without difficulty, and everything went smoothly until the problem of the roof confronted me.
Of what use the four walls without a roof?
And of what could a roof be made?
There were the spare oars, very true.
They would serve as roof-beams; but with what was I to cover them?
Moss would never do.
Tundra grass was impracticable.
We needed the sail for the boat, and the tarpaulin had begun to leak.
"Winters used walrus skins on his hut," I said.
"There are the seals," she suggested.
So next day the hunting began.
I did not know how to shoot, but I proceeded to learn.
And when I had expended some thirty shells for three seals, I decided that the ammunition would be exhausted before I acquired the necessary knowledge.
I had used eight shells for lighting fires before I hit upon the device of banking the embers with wet moss, and there remained not over a hundred shells in the box.
"We must club the seals," I announced, when convinced of my poor marksmanship.
"I have heard the sealers talk about clubbing them."
"They are so pretty," she objected.
"I cannot bear to think of it being done.
It is so directly brutal, you know; so different from shooting them."
"That roof must go on," I answered grimly.
"Winter is almost here.
It is our lives against theirs.
It is unfortunate we haven't plenty of ammunition, but I think, anyway, that they suffer less from being clubbed than from being all shot up.
Besides, I shall do the clubbing."
"That's just it," she began eagerly, and broke off in sudden confusion.
"Of course," I began, "if you prefer - "
"But what shall I be doing?"
she interrupted, with that softness I knew full well to be insistence.
"Gathering firewood and cooking dinner," I answered lightly.
She shook her head.
"It is too dangerous for you to attempt alone."
"I know, I know," she waived my protest.
"I am only a weak woman, but just my small assistance may enable you to escape disaster."
"But the clubbing?"
I suggested.
"Of course, you will do that.
I shall probably scream.
I'll look away when - "
"The danger is most serious," I laughed.
"I shall use my judgment when to look and when not to look," she replied with a grand air.
The upshot of the affair was that she accompanied me next morning.
I rowed into the adjoining cove and up to the edge of the beach.
There were seals all about us in the water, and the bellowing thousands on the beach compelled us to shout at each other to make ourselves heard.
"I know men club them," I said, trying to reassure myself, and gazing doubtfully at a large bull, not thirty feet away, upreared on his fore-flippers and regarding me intently.
"But the question is, How do they club them?"
"Let us gather tundra grass and thatch the roof," Maud said.
She was as frightened as I at the prospect, and we had reason to be gazing at close range at the gleaming teeth and dog-like mouths.
"I always thought they were afraid of men," I said.
"How do I know they are not afraid?"
I queried a moment later, after having rowed a few more strokes along the beach.
"Perhaps, if I were to step boldly ashore, they would cut for it, and I could not catch up with one."
And still I hesitated.
"I heard of a man, once, who invaded the nesting grounds of wild geese," Maud said.
"They killed him."
"The geese?"
"Yes, the geese.
My brother told me about it when I was a little girl."
"But I know men club them," I persisted.
"I think the tundra grass will make just as good a roof," she said.
Far from her intention, her words were maddening me, driving me on.
I could not play the coward before her eyes.
"Here goes," I said, backing water with one oar and running the bow ashore.
I stepped out and advanced valiantly upon a long-maned bull in the midst of his wives.
I was armed with the regular club with which the boat-pullers killed the wounded seals gaffed aboard by the hunters.
It was only a foot and a half long, and in my superb ignorance I never dreamed that the club used ashore when raiding the rookeries measured four to five feet.
The cows lumbered out of my way, and the distance between me and the bull decreased.
He raised himself on his flippers with an angry movement.
We were a dozen feet apart.
Still I advanced steadily, looking for him to turn tail at any moment and run.
At six feet the panicky thought rushed into my mind, What if he will not run?
Why, then I shall club him, came the answer.
In my fear I had forgotten that I was there to get the bull instead of to make him run.
And just then he gave a snort and a snarl and rushed at me.
His eyes were blazing, his mouth was wide open; the teeth gleamed cruelly white.
Without shame, I confess that it was I who turned and footed it.
He ran awkwardly, but he ran well.
He was but two paces behind when I tumbled into the boat, and as I shoved off with an oar his teeth crunched down upon the blade.
The stout wood was crushed like an egg-shell.
Maud and I were astounded.
A moment later he had dived under the boat, seized the keel in his mouth, and was shaking the boat violently.
"My!"
said Maud.
"Let's go back."
I shook my head.
"I can do what other men have done, and I know that other men have clubbed seals.
But I think I'll leave the bulls alone next time."
"I wish you wouldn't," she said.
"Now don't say, 'Please, please,'" I cried, half angrily, I do believe.
She made no reply, and I knew my tone must have hurt her.
"I beg your pardon," I said, or shouted, rather, in order to make myself heard above the roar of the rookery.
"If you say so, I'll turn and go back; but honestly, I'd rather stay."
"Now don't say that this is what you get for bringing a woman along," she said.
She smiled at me whimsically, gloriously, and I knew there was no need for forgiveness.
I rowed a couple of hundred feet along the beach so as to recover my nerves, and then stepped ashore again.
"Do be cautious," she called after me.
I nodded my head and proceeded to make a flank attack on the nearest harem.
All went well until I aimed a blow at an outlying cow's head and fell short.
She snorted and tried to scramble away.
I ran in close and struck another blow, hitting the shoulder instead of the head.
"Watch out!"
I heard Maud scream.
In my excitement I had not been taking notice of other things, and I looked up to see the lord of the harem charging down upon me.
Again I fled to the boat, hotly pursued; but this time Maud made no suggestion of turning back.
"It would be better, I imagine, if you let harems alone and devoted your attention to lonely and inoffensive-looking seals," was what she said.
"I think I have read something about them.
Dr. Jordan's book, I believe.
They are the young bulls, not old enough to have harems of their own.
He called them the holluschickie, or something like that.
It seems to me if we find where they haul out - "
"It seems to me that your fighting instinct is aroused," I laughed.
She flushed quickly and prettily.
"I'll admit I don't like defeat any more than you do, or any more than I like the idea of killing such pretty, inoffensive creatures."
"Pretty!"
I sniffed.
"I failed to mark anything pre-eminently pretty about those foamy-mouthed beasts that raced me."
"Your point of view," she laughed.
"You lacked perspective.
Now if you did not have to get so close to the subject - "
"The very thing!"
I cried.
"What I need is a longer club.
And there's that broken oar ready to hand."
"It just comes to me," she said, "that Captain Larsen was telling me how the men raided the rookeries.
They drive the seals, in small herds, a short distance inland before they kill them."
"I don't care to undertake the herding of one of those harems," I objected.
"But there are the holluschickie," she said.
"The holluschickie haul out by themselves, and Dr. Jordan says that paths are left between the harems, and that as long as the holluschickie keep strictly to the path they are unmolested by the masters of the harem."
"There's one now," I said, pointing to a young bull in the water.
"Let's watch him, and follow him if he hauls out."
He swam directly to the beach and clambered out into a small opening between two harems, the masters of which made warning noises but did not attack him.
We watched him travel slowly inward, threading about among the harems along what must have been the path.
"Here goes," I said, stepping out; but I confess my heart was in my mouth as I thought of going through the heart of that monstrous herd.
"It would be wise to make the boat fast," Maud said.
She had stepped out beside me, and I regarded her with wonderment.
She nodded her head determinedly.
"Yes, I'm going with you, so you may as well secure the boat and arm me with a club."
"Let's go back," I said dejectedly.
"I think tundra grass, will do, after all."
"You know it won't," was her reply.
"Shall I lead?"
With a shrug of the shoulders, but with the warmest admiration and pride at heart for this woman, I equipped her with the broken oar and took another for myself.
It was with nervous trepidation that we made the first few rods of the journey.
Once Maud screamed in terror as a cow thrust an inquisitive nose toward her foot, and several times I quickened my pace for the same reason.
But, beyond warning coughs from either side, there were no signs of hostility.
It was a rookery which had never been raided by the hunters, and in consequence the seals were mild-tempered and at the same time unafraid.
In the very heart of the herd the din was terrific.
It was almost dizzying in its effect.
I paused and smiled reassuringly at Maud, for I had recovered my equanimity sooner than she.
I could see that she was still badly frightened.
She came close to me and shouted:
"I'm dreadfully afraid!"
And I was not.
Though the novelty had not yet worn off, the peaceful comportment of the seals had quieted my alarm.
Maud was trembling.
"I'm afraid, and I'm not afraid," she chattered with shaking jaws.
"It's my miserable body, not I."
"It's all right, it's all right," I reassured her, my arm passing instinctively and protectingly around her.
I shall never forget, in that moment, how instantly conscious I became of my manhood.
The primitive deeps of my nature stirred.
I felt myself masculine, the protector of the weak, the fighting male.
And, best of all, I felt myself the protector of my loved one.
She leaned against me, so light and lily-frail, and as her trembling eased away it seemed as though I became aware of prodigious strength.
I felt myself a match for the most ferocious bull in the herd, and I know, had such a bull charged upon me, that I should have met it unflinchingly and quite coolly, and I know that I should have killed it.
"I am all right now," she said, looking up at me gratefully.
"Let us go on."
And that the strength in me had quieted her and given her confidence, filled me with an exultant joy.
The youth of the race seemed burgeoning in me, over-civilized man that I was, and I lived for myself the old hunting days and forest nights of my remote and forgotten ancestry.
I had much for which to thank Wolf Larsen, was my thought as we went along the path between the jostling harems.
A quarter of a mile inland we came upon the holluschickie - sleek young bulls, living out the loneliness of their bachelorhood and gathering strength against the day when they would fight their way into the ranks of the Benedicts.
Everything now went smoothly.
I seemed to know just what to do and how to do it.
Shouting, making threatening gestures with my club, and even prodding the lazy ones, I quickly cut out a score of the young bachelors from their companions.
Whenever one made an attempt to break back toward the water, I headed it off.
Maud took an active part in the drive, and with her cries and flourishings of the broken oar was of considerable assistance.
I noticed, though, that whenever one looked tired and lagged, she let it slip past.
But I noticed, also, whenever one, with a show of fight, tried to break past, that her eyes glinted and showed bright, and she rapped it smartly with her club.
"My, it's exciting!"
she cried, pausing from sheer weakness.
"I think I'll sit down."
I drove the little herd (a dozen strong, now, what of the escapes she had permitted) a hundred yards farther on; and by the time she joined me I had finished the slaughter and was beginning to skin.
An hour later we went proudly back along the path between the harems.
And twice again we came down the path burdened with skins, till I thought we had enough to roof the hut.
I set the sail, laid one tack out of the cove, and on the other tack made our own little inner cove.
"It's just like home-coming," Maud said, as I ran the boat ashore.
I heard her words with a responsive thrill, it was all so dearly intimate and natural, and I said:
"It seems as though I have lived this life always.
The world of books and bookish folk is very vague, more like a dream memory than an actuality.
I surely have hunted and forayed and fought all the days of my life.
And you, too, seem a part of it.
You are - " I was on the verge of saying, "my woman, my mate," but glibly changed it to - "standing the hardship well."
But her ear had caught the flaw.
She recognized a flight that midmost broke.
She gave me a quick look.
"Not that.
You were saying - ?"
"That the American Mrs. Meynell was living the life of a savage and living it quite successfully," I said easily.
"Oh," was all she replied; but I could have sworn there was a note of disappointment in her voice.
But "my woman, my mate" kept ringing in my head for the rest of the day and for many days.
Yet never did it ring more loudly than that night, as I watched her draw back the blanket of moss from the coals, blow up the fire, and cook the evening meal.
It must have been latent savagery stirring in me, for the old words, so bound up with the roots of the race, to grip me and thrill me.
And grip and thrill they did, till I fell asleep, murmuring them to myself over and over again.
"It will smell," I said, "but it will keep in the heat and keep out the rain and snow."
We were surveying the completed seal-skin roof.
"It is clumsy, but it will serve the purpose, and that is the main thing," I went on, yearning for her praise.
And she clapped her hands and declared that she was hugely pleased.
"But it is dark in here," she said the next moment, her shoulders shrinking with a little involuntary shiver.
"You might have suggested a window when the walls were going up," I said.
"It was for you, and you should have seen the need of a window."
"But I never do see the obvious, you know," she laughed back.
"And besides, you can knock a hole in the wall at any time."
"Quite true; I had not thought of it," I replied, wagging my head sagely.
"But have you thought of ordering the window-glass?
Just call up the firm, - Red, 4451, I think it is, - and tell them what size and kind of glass you wish."
"That means - " she began.
"No window."
It was a dark and evil-appearing thing, that hut, not fit for aught better than swine in a civilized land; but for us, who had known the misery of the open boat, it was a snug little habitation.
Following the housewarming, which was accomplished by means of seal-oil and a wick made from cotton calking, came the hunting for our winter's meat and the building of the second hut.
It was a simple affair, now, to go forth in the morning and return by noon with a boatload of seals.
And then, while I worked at building the hut, Maud tried out the oil from the blubber and kept a slow fire under the frames of meat.
I had heard of jerking beef on the plains, and our seal-meat, cut in thin strips and hung in the smoke, cured excellently.
The second hut was easier to erect, for I built it against the first, and only three walls were required.
But it was work, hard work, all of it.
Maud and I worked from dawn till dark, to the limit of our strength, so that when night came we crawled stiffly to bed and slept the animal-like sleep of exhaustion.
And yet Maud declared that she had never felt better or stronger in her life.
I knew this was true of myself, but hers was such a lily strength that I feared she would break down.
Often and often, her last-reserve force gone, I have seen her stretched flat on her back on the sand in the way she had of resting and recuperating.
And then she would be up on her feet and toiling hard as ever.
Where she obtained this strength was the marvel to me.
"Think of the long rest this winter," was her reply to my remonstrances.
"Why, we'll be clamorous for something to do."
We held a housewarming in my hut the night it was roofed.
It was the end of the third day of a fierce storm which had swung around the compass from the south-east to the north-west, and which was then blowing directly in upon us.
The beaches of the outer cove were thundering with the surf, and even in our land-locked inner cove a respectable sea was breaking.
No high backbone of island sheltered us from the wind, and it whistled and bellowed about the hut till at times I feared for the strength of the walls.
The skin roof, stretched tightly as a drumhead, I had thought, sagged and bellied with every gust; and innumerable interstices in the walls, not so tightly stuffed with moss as Maud had supposed, disclosed themselves.
Yet the seal-oil burned brightly and we were warm and comfortable.
It was a pleasant evening indeed, and we voted that as a social function on Endeavour Island it had not yet been eclipsed.
Our minds were at ease.
Not only had we resigned ourselves to the bitter winter, but we were prepared for it.
The seals could depart on their mysterious journey into the south at any time, now, for all we cared; and the storms held no terror for us.
Not only were we sure of being dry and warm and sheltered from the wind, but we had the softest and most luxurious mattresses that could be made from moss.
This had been Maud's idea, and she had herself jealously gathered all the moss.
This was to be my first night on the mattress, and I knew I should sleep the sweeter because she had made it.
As she rose to go she turned to me with the whimsical way she had, and said:
"Something is going to happen - is happening, for that matter.
I feel it.
Something is coming here, to us.
It is coming now.
I don't know what, but it is coming."
"Good or bad?"
I asked.
She shook her head.
"I don't know, but it is there, somewhere."
She pointed in the direction of the sea and wind.
"It's a lee shore," I laughed, "and I am sure I'd rather be here than arriving, a night like this."
"You are not frightened?"
I asked, as I stepped to open the door for her.
Her eyes looked bravely into mine.
"And you feel well?
perfectly well?"
"Never better," was her answer.
We talked a little longer before she went.
"Good-night, Maud," I said.
"Good-night, Humphrey," she said.
This use of our given names had come about quite as a matter of course, and was as unpremeditated as it was natural.  
In that moment I could have put my arms around her and drawn her to me.  
I should certainly have done so out in that world to which we belonged.  
As it was, the situation stopped there in the only way it could; but I was left alone in my little hut, glowing warmly through and through with a pleasant satisfaction; and I knew that a tie, or a tacit something, existed between us which had not existed before.
I awoke, oppressed by a mysterious sensation.
There seemed something missing in my environment.
But the mystery and oppressiveness vanished after the first few seconds of waking, when I identified the missing something as the wind.
I had fallen asleep in that state of nerve tension with which one meets the continuous shock of sound or movement, and I had awakened, still tense, bracing myself to meet the pressure of something which no longer bore upon me.
It was the first night I had spent under cover in several months, and I lay luxuriously for some minutes under my blankets (for once not wet with fog or spray), analysing, first, the effect produced upon me by the cessation of the wind, and next, the joy which was mine from resting on the mattress made by Maud's hands.
When I had dressed and opened the door, I heard the waves still lapping on the beach, garrulously attesting the fury of the night.
It was a clear day, and the sun was shining.
I had slept late, and I stepped outside with sudden energy, bent upon making up lost time as befitted a dweller on Endeavour Island.
And when outside, I stopped short.
I believed my eyes without question, and yet I was for the moment stunned by what they disclosed to me.
There, on the beach, not fifty feet away, bow on, dismasted, was a black-hulled vessel.
Masts and booms, tangled with shrouds, sheets, and rent canvas, were rubbing gently alongside.
I could have rubbed my eyes as I looked.
There was the home-made galley we had built, the familiar break of the poop, the low yacht-cabin scarcely rising above the rail.
It was the Ghost.
What freak of fortune had brought it here - here of all spots?
what chance of chances?
I looked at the bleak, inaccessible wall at my back and know the profundity of despair.
Escape was hopeless, out of the question.
I thought of Maud, asleep there in the hut we had reared; I remembered her "Good-night, Humphrey"; "my woman, my mate," went ringing through my brain, but now, alas, it was a knell that sounded.
Then everything went black before my eyes.
Possibly it was the fraction of a second, but I had no knowledge of how long an interval had lapsed before I was myself again.
There lay the Ghost, bow on to the beach, her splintered bowsprit projecting over the sand, her tangled spars rubbing against her side to the lift of the crooning waves.
Something must be done, must be done.
It came upon me suddenly, as strange, that nothing moved aboard.
Wearied from the night of struggle and wreck, all hands were yet asleep, I thought.
My next thought was that Maud and I might yet escape.
If we could take to the boat and make round the point before any one awoke?
I would call her and start.
My hand was lifted at her door to knock, when I recollected the smallness of the island.
We could never hide ourselves upon it.
There was nothing for us but the wide raw ocean.
I thought of our snug little huts, our supplies of meat and oil and moss and firewood, and I knew that we could never survive the wintry sea and the great storms which were to come.
So I stood, with hesitant knuckle, without her door.
It was impossible, impossible.
A wild thought of rushing in and killing her as she slept rose in my mind.
And then, in a flash, the better solution came to me.
All hands were asleep.
Why not creep aboard the Ghost, - well I knew the way to Wolf Larsen's bunk, - and kill him in his sleep?
After that - well, we would see.
But with him dead there was time and space in which to prepare to do other things; and besides, whatever new situation arose, it could not possibly be worse than the present one.
My knife was at my hip.
I returned to my hut for the shot-gun, made sure it was loaded, and went down to the Ghost.
With some difficulty, and at the expense of a wetting to the waist, I climbed aboard.
The forecastle scuttle was open.
I paused to listen for the breathing of the men, but there was no breathing.
I almost gasped as the thought came to me: What if the Ghost is deserted?
I listened more closely.
There was no sound.
I cautiously descended the ladder.
The place had the empty and musty feel and smell usual to a dwelling no longer inhabited.
Everywhere was a thick litter of discarded and ragged garments, old sea-boots, leaky oilskins - all the worthless forecastle dunnage of a long voyage.
Abandoned hastily, was my conclusion, as I ascended to the deck.
Hope was alive again in my breast, and I looked about me with greater coolness.
I noted that the boats were missing.
The steerage told the same tale as the forecastle.
The hunters had packed their belongings with similar haste.
The Ghost was deserted.
It was Maud's and mine.
I thought of the ship's stores and the lazarette beneath the cabin, and the idea came to me of surprising Maud with something nice for breakfast.
The reaction from my fear, and the knowledge that the terrible deed I had come to do was no longer necessary, made me boyish and eager.
I went up the steerage companion-way two steps at a time, with nothing distinct in my mind except joy and the hope that Maud would sleep on until the surprise breakfast was quite ready for her.
As I rounded the galley, a new satisfaction was mine at thought of all the splendid cooking utensils inside.
I sprang up the break of the poop, and saw - Wolf Larsen.
What of my impetus and the stunning surprise, I clattered three or four steps along the deck before I could stop myself.
He was standing in the companion-way, only his head and shoulders visible, staring straight at me.
His arms were resting on the half-open slide.
He made no movement whatever - simply stood there, staring at me.
I began to tremble.
The old stomach sickness clutched me.
I put one hand on the edge of the house to steady myself.
My lips seemed suddenly dry and I moistened them against the need of speech.
Nor did I for an instant take my eyes off him.
Neither of us spoke.
There was something ominous in his silence, his immobility.
All my old fear of him returned and my new fear was increased an hundred-fold.
And still we stood, the pair of us, staring at each other.
I was aware of the demand for action, and, my old helplessness strong upon me, I was waiting for him to take the initiative.
Then, as the moments went by, it came to me that the situation was analogous to the one in which I had approached the long-maned bull, my intention of clubbing obscured by fear until it became a desire to make him run.
So it was at last impressed upon me that I was there, not to have Wolf Larsen take the initiative, but to take it myself.
I cocked both barrels and levelled the shot-gun at him.
Had he moved, attempted to drop down the companion-way, I know I would have shot him.
But he stood motionless and staring as before.
And as I faced him, with levelled gun shaking in my hands, I had time to note the worn and haggard appearance of his face.
It was as if some strong anxiety had wasted it.
The cheeks were sunken, and there was a wearied, puckered expression on the brow.
And it seemed to me that his eyes were strange, not only the expression, but the physical seeming, as though the optic nerves and supporting muscles had suffered strain and slightly twisted the eyeballs.
All this I saw, and my brain now working rapidly, I thought a thousand thoughts; and yet I could not pull the triggers.
I lowered the gun and stepped to the corner of the cabin, primarily to relieve the tension on my nerves and to make a new start, and incidentally to be closer.
Again I raised the gun.
He was almost at arm's length.
There was no hope for him.
I was resolved.
There was no possible chance of missing him, no matter how poor my marksmanship.
And yet I wrestled with myself and could not pull the triggers.
"Well?"
he demanded impatiently.
I strove vainly to force my fingers down on the triggers, and vainly I strove to say something.
"Why don't you shoot?"
he asked.
I cleared my throat of a huskiness which prevented speech.
"Hump," he said slowly, "you can't do it.
You are not exactly afraid.
You are impotent.
Your conventional morality is stronger than you.
You are the slave to the opinions which have credence among the people you have known and have read about.
Their code has been drummed into your head from the time you lisped, and in spite of your philosophy, and of what I have taught you, it won't let you kill an unarmed, unresisting man."
"I know it," I said hoarsely.
"And you know that I would kill an unarmed man as readily as I would smoke a cigar," he went on.
"You know me for what I am, - my worth in the world by your standard.
You have called me snake, tiger, shark, monster, and Caliban.
And yet, you little rag puppet, you little echoing mechanism, you are unable to kill me as you would a snake or a shark, because I have hands, feet, and a body shaped somewhat like yours.
Bah!
I had hoped better things of you, Hump."
He stepped out of the companion-way and came up to me.
"Put down that gun.
I want to ask you some questions.
I haven't had a chance to look around yet.
What place is this?
How is the Ghost lying?
How did you get wet?
Where's Maud?
- I beg your pardon, Miss Brewster - or should I say, 'Mrs.
Van Weyden'?"
I had backed away from him, almost weeping at my inability to shoot him, but not fool enough to put down the gun.
I hoped, desperately, that he might commit some hostile act, attempt to strike me or choke me; for in such way only I knew I could be stirred to shoot.
"This is Endeavour Island," I said.
"Never heard of it," he broke in.
"At least, that's our name for it," I amended.
"Our?"
he queried.
"Who's our?"
"Miss Brewster and myself.
And the Ghost is lying, as you can see for yourself, bow on to the beach."
"There are seals here," he said.
"They woke me up with their barking, or I'd be sleeping yet.
I heard them when I drove in last night.
They were the first warning that I was on a lee shore.
It's a rookery, the kind of a thing I've hunted for years.
Thanks to my brother Death, I've lighted on a fortune.
It's a mint.
What's its bearings?"
"Haven't the least idea," I said.
"But you ought to know quite closely.
What were your last observations?"
He smiled inscrutably, but did not answer.
"Well, where's all hands?"
I asked.
"How does it come that you are alone?"
I was prepared for him again to set aside my question, and was surprised at the readiness of his reply.
"My brother got me inside forty-eight hours, and through no fault of mine.
Boarded me in the night with only the watch on deck.
Hunters went back on me.
He gave them a bigger lay.
Heard him offering it.
Did it right before me.
Of course the crew gave me the go-by.
That was to be expected.
All hands went over the side, and there I was, marooned on my own vessel.
It was Death's turn, and it's all in the family anyway."
"But how did you lose the masts?"
I asked.
"Walk over and examine those lanyards," he said, pointing to where the mizzen-rigging should have been.
"They have been cut with a knife!"
I exclaimed.
"Not quite," he laughed.
"It was a neater job.
Look again."
I looked.
The lanyards had been almost severed, with just enough left to hold the shrouds till some severe strain should be put upon them.
"Cooky did that," he laughed again.
"I know, though I didn't spot him at it.
Kind of evened up the score a bit."
"Good for Mugridge!"
I cried.
"Yes, that's what I thought when everything went over the side.
Only I said it on the other side of my mouth."
"But what were you doing while all this was going on?"
I asked.
"My best, you may be sure, which wasn't much under the circumstances."
I turned to re-examine Thomas Mugridge's work.
"I guess I'll sit down and take the sunshine," I heard Wolf Larsen saying.
There was a hint, just a slight hint, of physical feebleness in his voice, and it was so strange that I looked quickly at him.
His hand was sweeping nervously across his face, as though he were brushing away cobwebs.
I was puzzled.
The whole thing was so unlike the Wolf Larsen I had known.
"How are your headaches?"
I asked.
"They still trouble me," was his answer.
"I think I have one coming on now."
He slipped down from his sitting posture till he lay on the deck.
Then he rolled over on his side, his head resting on the biceps of the under arm, the forearm shielding his eyes from the sun.
I stood regarding him wonderingly.
"Now's your chance, Hump," he said.
"I don't understand," I lied, for I thoroughly understood.
"Oh, nothing," he added softly, as if he were drowsing; "only you've got me where you want me."
"No, I haven't," I retorted; "for I want you a few thousand miles away from here."
He chuckled, and thereafter spoke no more.
He did not stir as I passed by him and went down into the cabin.
I lifted the trap in the floor, but for some moments gazed dubiously into the darkness of the lazarette beneath.
I hesitated to descend.
What if his lying down were a ruse?
Pretty, indeed, to be caught there like a rat.
I crept softly up the companion-way and peeped at him.
He was lying as I had left him.
Again I went below; but before I dropped into the lazarette I took the precaution of casting down the door in advance.
At least there would be no lid to the trap.
But it was all needless.
I regained the cabin with a store of jams, sea-biscuits, canned meats, and such things, - all I could carry, - and replaced the trap-door.
A peep at Wolf Larsen showed me that he had not moved.
A bright thought struck me.
I stole into his state-room and possessed myself of his revolvers.
There were no other weapons, though I thoroughly ransacked the three remaining state-rooms.
To make sure, I returned and went through the steerage and forecastle, and in the galley gathered up all the sharp meat and vegetable knives.
Then I bethought me of the great yachtsman's knife he always carried, and I came to him and spoke to him, first softly, then loudly.
He did not move.
I bent over and took it from his pocket.
I breathed more freely.
He had no arms with which to attack me from a distance; while I, armed, could always forestall him should he attempt to grapple me with his terrible gorilla arms.
Filling a coffee-pot and frying-pan with part of my plunder, and taking some chinaware from the cabin pantry, I left Wolf Larsen lying in the sun and went ashore.
Maud was still asleep.
I blew up the embers (we had not yet arranged a winter kitchen), and quite feverishly cooked the breakfast.
Toward the end, I heard her moving about within the hut, making her toilet.
Just as all was ready and the coffee poured, the door opened and she came forth.
"It's not fair of you," was her greeting.
"You are usurping one of my prerogatives.
You know you I agreed that the cooking should be mine, and - "
"But just this once," I pleaded.
"If you promise not to do it again," she smiled.
"Unless, of course, you have grown tired of my poor efforts."
To my delight she never once looked toward the beach, and I maintained the banter with such success all unconsciously she sipped coffee from the china cup, ate fried evaporated potatoes, and spread marmalade on her biscuit.
But it could not last.
I saw the surprise that came over her.
She had discovered the china plate from which she was eating.
She looked over the breakfast, noting detail after detail.
Then she looked at me, and her face turned slowly toward the beach.
"Humphrey!"
she said.
The old unnamable terror mounted into her eyes.
"Is - he?"
she quavered.
I nodded my head.
We waited all day for Wolf Larsen to come ashore.
It was an intolerable period of anxiety.
Each moment one or the other of us cast expectant glances toward the Ghost.
But he did not come.
He did not even appear on deck.
"Perhaps it is his headache," I said.
"I left him lying on the poop.
He may lie there all night.
I think I'll go and see."
Maud looked entreaty at me.
"It is all right," I assured her.
"I shall take the revolvers.
You know I collected every weapon on board."
"But there are his arms, his hands, his terrible, terrible hands!"
she objected.
And then she cried, "Oh, Humphrey, I am afraid of him!
Don't go - please don't go!"
She rested her hand appealingly on mine, and sent my pulse fluttering.
My heart was surely in my eyes for a moment.
The dear and lovely woman!
And she was so much the woman, clinging and appealing, sunshine and dew to my manhood, rooting it deeper and sending through it the sap of a new strength.
I was for putting my arm around her, as when in the midst of the seal herd; but I considered, and refrained.
"I shall not take any risks," I said.
"I'll merely peep over the bow and see."
She pressed my hand earnestly and let me go.
But the space on deck where I had left him lying was vacant.
He had evidently gone below.
That night we stood alternate watches, one of us sleeping at a time; for there was no telling what Wolf Larsen might do.
He was certainly capable of anything.
The next day we waited, and the next, and still he made no sign.
"These headaches of his, these attacks," Maud said, on the afternoon of the fourth day; "Perhaps he is ill, very ill.
He may be dead."
"Or dying," was her afterthought when she had waited some time for me to speak.
"Better so," I answered.
"But think, Humphrey, a fellow-creature in his last lonely hour."
"Perhaps," I suggested.
"Yes, even perhaps," she acknowledged.
"But we do not know.
It would be terrible if he were.
I could never forgive myself.
We must do something."
"Perhaps," I suggested again.
I waited, smiling inwardly at the woman of her which compelled a solicitude for Wolf Larsen, of all creatures.
Where was her solicitude for me, I thought, - for me whom she had been afraid to have merely peep aboard?
She was too subtle not to follow the trend of my silence.
And she was as direct as she was subtle.
"You must go aboard, Humphrey, and find out," she said.
"And if you want to laugh at me, you have my consent and forgiveness."
I arose obediently and went down the beach.
"Do be careful," she called after me.
I waved my arm from the forecastle head and dropped down to the deck.
Aft I walked to the cabin companion, where I contented myself with hailing below.
Wolf Larsen answered, and as he started to ascend the stairs I cocked my revolver.
I displayed it openly during our conversation, but he took no notice of it.
He appeared the same, physically, as when last I saw him, but he was gloomy and silent.
In fact, the few words we spoke could hardly be called a conversation.
I did not inquire why he had not been ashore, nor did he ask why I had not come aboard.
His head was all right again, he said, and so, without further parley, I left him.
Maud received my report with obvious relief, and the sight of smoke which later rose in the galley put her in a more cheerful mood.
The next day, and the next, we saw the galley smoke rising, and sometimes we caught glimpses of him on the poop.
But that was all.
He made no attempt to come ashore.
This we knew, for we still maintained our night-watches.
We were waiting for him to do something, to show his hand, so to say, and his inaction puzzled and worried us.
A week of this passed by.
We had no other interest than Wolf Larsen, and his presence weighed us down with an apprehension which prevented us from doing any of the little things we had planned.
But at the end of the week the smoke ceased rising from the galley, and he no longer showed himself on the poop.
I could see Maud's solicitude again growing, though she timidly - and even proudly, I think - forbore a repetition of her request.
After all, what censure could be put upon her?
She was divinely altruistic, and she was a woman.
Besides, I was myself aware of hurt at thought of this man whom I had tried to kill, dying alone with his fellow-creatures so near.
He was right.
The code of my group was stronger than I.
The fact that he had hands, feet, and a body shaped somewhat like mine, constituted a claim which I could not ignore.
So I did not wait a second time for Maud to send me.
I discovered that we stood in need of condensed milk and marmalade, and announced that I was going aboard.
I could see that she wavered.
She even went so far as to murmur that they were non-essentials and that my trip after them might be inexpedient.
And as she had followed the trend of my silence, she now followed the trend of my speech, and she knew that I was going aboard, not because of condensed milk and marmalade, but because of her and of her anxiety, which she knew she had failed to hide.
I took off my shoes when I gained the forecastle head, and went noiselessly aft in my stocking feet.
Nor did I call this time from the top of the companion-way.
Cautiously descending, I found the cabin deserted.
The door to his state-room was closed.
At first I thought of knocking, then I remembered my ostensible errand and resolved to carry it out.
Carefully avoiding noise, I lifted the trap-door in the floor and set it to one side.
The slop-chest, as well as the provisions, was stored in the lazarette, and I took advantage of the opportunity to lay in a stock of underclothing.
As I emerged from the lazarette I heard sounds in Wolf Larsen's state-room.
I crouched and listened.
The door-knob rattled.
Furtively, instinctively, I slunk back behind the table and drew and cocked my revolver.
The door swung open and he came forth.
Never had I seen so profound a despair as that which I saw on his face, - the face of Wolf Larsen the fighter, the strong man, the indomitable one.
For all the world like a woman wringing her hands, he raised his clenched fists and groaned.
One fist unclosed, and the open palm swept across his eyes as though brushing away cobwebs.
"God!
God!"
he groaned, and the clenched fists were raised again to the infinite despair with which his throat vibrated.
It was horrible.
I was trembling all over, and I could feel the shivers running up and down my spine and the sweat standing out on my forehead.
Surely there can be little in this world more awful than the spectacle of a strong man in the moment when he is utterly weak and broken.
But Wolf Larsen regained control of himself by an exertion of his remarkable will.
And it was exertion.
His whole frame shook with the struggle.
He resembled a man on the verge of a fit.
His face strove to compose itself, writhing and twisting in the effort till he broke down again.
Once more the clenched fists went upward and he groaned.
He caught his breath once or twice and sobbed.
Then he was successful.
I could have thought him the old Wolf Larsen, and yet there was in his movements a vague suggestion of weakness and indecision.
He started for the companion-way, and stepped forward quite as I had been accustomed to see him do; and yet again, in his very walk, there seemed that suggestion of weakness and indecision.
I was now concerned with fear for myself.
The open trap lay directly in his path, and his discovery of it would lead instantly to his discovery of me.
I was angry with myself for being caught in so cowardly a position, crouching on the floor.
There was yet time.
I rose swiftly to my feet, and, I know, quite unconsciously assumed a defiant attitude.
He took no notice of me.
Nor did he notice the open trap.
Before I could grasp the situation, or act, he had walked right into the trap.
One foot was descending into the opening, while the other foot was just on the verge of beginning the uplift.
But when the descending foot missed the solid flooring and felt vacancy beneath, it was the old Wolf Larsen and the tiger muscles that made the falling body spring across the opening, even as it fell, so that he struck on his chest and stomach, with arms outstretched, on the floor of the opposite side.
The next instant he had drawn up his legs and rolled clear.
But he rolled into my marmalade and underclothes and against the trap-door.
The expression on his face was one of complete comprehension.
But before I could guess what he had comprehended, he had dropped the trap-door into place, closing the lazarette.
Then I understood.
He thought he had me inside.
Also, he was blind, blind as a bat.
I watched him, breathing carefully so that he should not hear me.
He stepped quickly to his state-room.
I saw his hand miss the door-knob by an inch, quickly fumble for it, and find it.
This was my chance.
I tiptoed across the cabin and to the top of the stairs.
He came back, dragging a heavy sea-chest, which he deposited on top of the trap.
Not content with this he fetched a second chest and placed it on top of the first.
Then he gathered up the marmalade and underclothes and put them on the table.
When he started up the companion-way, I retreated, silently rolling over on top of the cabin.
He shoved the slide part way back and rested his arms on it, his body still in the companion-way.
His attitude was of one looking forward the length of the schooner, or staring, rather, for his eyes were fixed and unblinking.
I was only five feet away and directly in what should have been his line of vision.
It was uncanny.
I felt myself a ghost, what of my invisibility.
I waved my hand back and forth, of course without effect; but when the moving shadow fell across his face I saw at once that he was susceptible to the impression.
His face became more expectant and tense as he tried to analyze and identify the impression.
He knew that he had responded to something from without, that his sensibility had been touched by a changing something in his environment; but what it was he could not discover.
I ceased waving my hand, so that the shadow remained stationary.
He slowly moved his head back and forth under it and turned from side to side, now in the sunshine, now in the shade, feeling the shadow, as it were, testing it by sensation.
I, too, was busy, trying to reason out how he was aware of the existence of so intangible a thing as a shadow.
If it were his eyeballs only that were affected, or if his optic nerve were not wholly destroyed, the explanation was simple.
If otherwise, then the only conclusion I could reach was that the sensitive skin recognized the difference of temperature between shade and sunshine.
Or, perhaps, - who can tell?
- it was that fabled sixth sense which conveyed to him the loom and feel of an object close at hand.
Giving over his attempt to determine the shadow, he stepped on deck and started forward, walking with a swiftness and confidence which surprised me.
And still there was that hint of the feebleness of the blind in his walk.
I knew it now for what it was.
To my amused chagrin, he discovered my shoes on the forecastle head and brought them back with him into the galley.
I watched him build the fire and set about cooking food for himself; then I stole into the cabin for my marmalade and underclothes, slipped back past the galley, and climbed down to the beach to deliver my barefoot report.
"It's too bad the Ghost has lost her masts.
Why we could sail away in her.
Don't you think we could, Humphrey?"
I sprang excitedly to my feet.
"I wonder, I wonder," I repeated, pacing up and down.
Maud's eyes were shining with anticipation as they followed me.
She had such faith in me!
And the thought of it was so much added power.
I remembered Michelet's "To man, woman is as the earth was to her legendary son; he has but to fall down and kiss her breast and he is strong again."
For the first time I knew the wonderful truth of his words.
Why, I was living them.
Maud was all this to me, an unfailing, source of strength and courage.
I had but to look at her, or think of her, and be strong again.
"It can be done, it can be done," I was thinking and asserting aloud.
"What men have done, I can do; and if they have never done this before, still I can do it."
"What?
for goodness' sake," Maud demanded.
"Do be merciful.
What is it you can do?"
"We can do it," I amended.
"Why, nothing else than put the masts back into the Ghost and sail away."
"Humphrey!"
she exclaimed.
And I felt as proud of my conception as if it were already a fact accomplished.
"But how is it possible to be done?"
she asked.
"I don't know," was my answer.
"I know only that I am capable of doing anything these days."
I smiled proudly at her - too proudly, for she dropped her eyes and was for the moment silent.
"But there is Captain Larsen," she objected.
"Blind and helpless," I answered promptly, waving him aside as a straw.
"But those terrible hands of his!
You know how he leaped across the opening of the lazarette."
"And you know also how I crept about and avoided him," I contended gaily.
"And lost your shoes."
"You'd hardly expect them to avoid Wolf Larsen without my feet inside of them."
We both laughed, and then went seriously to work constructing the plan whereby we were to step the masts of the Ghost and return to the world.
I remembered hazily the physics of my school days, while the last few months had given me practical experience with mechanical purchases.
I must say, though, when we walked down to the Ghost to inspect more closely the task before us, that the sight of the great masts lying in the water almost disheartened me.
Where were we to begin?
If there had been one mast standing, something high up to which to fasten blocks and tackles!
But there was nothing.
It reminded me of the problem of lifting oneself by one's boot-straps.
I understood the mechanics of levers; but where was I to get a fulcrum?
There was the mainmast, fifteen inches in diameter at what was now the butt, still sixty-five feet in length, and weighing, I roughly calculated, at least three thousand pounds.
And then came the foremast, larger in diameter, and weighing surely thirty-five hundred pounds.
Where was I to begin?
Maud stood silently by my side, while I evolved in my mind the contrivance known among sailors as "shears."
But, though known to sailors, I invented it there on Endeavour Island.
By crossing and lashing the ends of two spars, and then elevating them in the air like an inverted "V," I could get a point above the deck to which to make fast my hoisting tackle.
To this hoisting tackle I could, if necessary, attach a second hoisting tackle.
And then there was the windlass!
Maud saw that I had achieved a solution, and her eyes warmed sympathetically.
"What are you going to do?"
she asked.
"Clear that raffle," I answered, pointing to the tangled wreckage overside.
Ah, the decisiveness, the very sound of the words, was good in my ears.
"Clear that raffle!"
Imagine so salty a phrase on the lips of the Humphrey Van Weyden of a few months gone!
There must have been a touch of the melodramatic in my pose and voice, for Maud smiled.
Her appreciation of the ridiculous was keen, and in all things she unerringly saw and felt, where it existed, the touch of sham, the overshading, the overtone.
It was this which had given poise and penetration to her own work and made her of worth to the world.
The serious critic, with the sense of humour and the power of expression, must inevitably command the world's ear.
And so it was that she had commanded.
Her sense of humour was really the artist's instinct for proportion.
"I'm sure I've heard it before, somewhere, in books," she murmured gleefully.
I had an instinct for proportion myself, and I collapsed forthwith, descending from the dominant pose of a master of matter to a state of humble confusion which was, to say the least, very miserable.
Her hand leapt out at once to mine.
"I'm so sorry," she said.
"No need to be," I gulped.
"It does me good.
There's too much of the schoolboy in me.
All of which is neither here nor there.
What we've got to do is actually and literally to clear that raffle.
If you'll come with me in the boat, we'll get to work and straighten things out."
"'When the topmen clear the raffle with their clasp-knives in their teeth,'" she quoted at me; and for the rest of the afternoon we made merry over our labour.
Her task was to hold the boat in position while I worked at the tangle.
And such a tangle - halyards, sheets, guys, down-hauls, shrouds, stays, all washed about and back and forth and through, and twined and knotted by the sea.
I cut no more than was necessary, and what with passing the long ropes under and around the booms and masts, of unreeving the halyards and sheets, of coiling down in the boat and uncoiling in order to pass through another knot in the bight, I was soon wet to the skin.
The sails did require some cutting, and the canvas, heavy with water, tried my strength severely; but I succeeded before nightfall in getting it all spread out on the beach to dry.
We were both very tired when we knocked off for supper, and we had done good work, too, though to the eye it appeared insignificant.
Next morning, with Maud as able assistant, I went into the hold of the Ghost to clear the steps of the mast-butts.
We had no more than begun work when the sound of my knocking and hammering brought Wolf Larsen.
"Hello below!"
he cried down the open hatch.
The sound of his voice made Maud quickly draw close to me, as for protection, and she rested one hand on my arm while we parleyed.
"Hello on deck," I replied.
"Good-morning to you."
"What are you doing down there?"
he demanded.
"Trying to scuttle my ship for me?"
"Quite the opposite; I'm repairing her," was my answer.
"But what in thunder are you repairing?"
There was puzzlement in his voice.
"Why, I'm getting everything ready for re-stepping the masts," I replied easily, as though it were the simplest project imaginable.
"It seems as though you're standing on your own legs at last, Hump," we heard him say; and then for some time he was silent.
"But I say, Hump," he called down.
"You can't do it."
"Oh, yes, I can," I retorted.
"I'm doing it now."
"But this is my vessel, my particular property.
What if I forbid you?"
"You forget," I replied.
"You are no longer the biggest bit of the ferment.
You were, once, and able to eat me, as you were pleased to phrase it; but there has been a diminishing, and I am now able to eat you.
The yeast has grown stale."
He gave a short, disagreeable laugh.
"I see you're working my philosophy back on me for all it is worth.
But don't make the mistake of under-estimating me.
For your own good I warn you."
"Since when have you become a philanthropist?"
I queried.
"Confess, now, in warning me for my own good, that you are very consistent."
He ignored my sarcasm, saying, "Suppose I clap the hatch on, now?
You won't fool me as you did in the lazarette."
"Wolf Larsen," I said sternly, for the first time addressing him by this his most familiar name, "I am unable to shoot a helpless, unresisting man.
You have proved that to my satisfaction as well as yours.
But I warn you now, and not so much for your own good as for mine, that I shall shoot you the moment you attempt a hostile act.
I can shoot you now, as I stand here; and if you are so minded, just go ahead and try to clap on the hatch."
"Nevertheless, I forbid you, I distinctly forbid your tampering with my ship."
"But, man!"
I expostulated, "you advance the fact that it is your ship as though it were a moral right.
You have never considered moral rights in your dealings with others.
You surely do not dream that I'll consider them in dealing with you?"
I had stepped underneath the open hatchway so that I could see him.
The lack of expression on his face, so different from when I had watched him unseen, was enhanced by the unblinking, staring eyes.
It was not a pleasant face to look upon.
"And none so poor, not even Hump, to do him reverence," he sneered.
The sneer was wholly in his voice.
His face remained expressionless as ever.
"How do you do, Miss Brewster," he said suddenly, after a pause.
I started.
She had made no noise whatever, had not even moved.
Could it be that some glimmer of vision remained to him?
or that his vision was coming back?
"How do you do, Captain Larsen," she answered.
"Pray, how did you know I was here?"
"Heard you breathing, of course.
I say, Hump's improving, don't you think so?"
"I don't know," she answered, smiling at me.
"I have never seen him otherwise."
"You should have seen him before, then."
"Wolf Larsen, in large doses," I murmured, "before and after taking."
"I want to tell you again, Hump," he said threateningly, "that you'd better leave things alone."
"But don't you care to escape as well as we?"
I asked incredulously.
"No," was his answer.
"I intend dying here."
"Well, we don't," I concluded defiantly, beginning again my knocking and hammering.
Next day, the mast-steps clear and everything in readiness, we started to get the two topmasts aboard.
The maintopmast was over thirty feet in length, the foretopmast nearly thirty, and it was of these that I intended making the shears.
It was puzzling work.
Fastening one end of a heavy tackle to the windlass, and with the other end fast to the butt of the foretopmast, I began to heave.
Maud held the turn on the windlass and coiled down the slack.
We were astonished at the ease with which the spar was lifted.
It was an improved crank windlass, and the purchase it gave was enormous.
Of course, what it gave us in power we paid for in distance; as many times as it doubled my strength, that many times was doubled the length of rope I heaved in.
The tackle dragged heavily across the rail, increasing its drag as the spar arose more and more out of the water, and the exertion on the windlass grew severe.
But when the butt of the topmast was level with the rail, everything came to a standstill.
"I might have known it," I said impatiently.
"Now we have to do it all over again."
"Why not fasten the tackle part way down the mast?"
Maud suggested.
"It's what I should have done at first," I answered, hugely disgusted with myself.
Slipping off a turn, I lowered the mast back into the water and fastened the tackle a third of the way down from the butt.
In an hour, what of this and of rests between the heaving, I had hoisted it to the point where I could hoist no more.
Eight feet of the butt was above the rail, and I was as far away as ever from getting the spar on board.
I sat down and pondered the problem.
It did not take long.
I sprang jubilantly to my feet.
"Now I have it!"
I cried.
"I ought to make the tackle fast at the point of balance.
And what we learn of this will serve us with everything else we have to hoist aboard."
Once again I undid all my work by lowering the mast into the water.
But I miscalculated the point of balance, so that when I heaved the top of the mast came up instead of the butt.
Maud looked despair, but I laughed and said it would do just as well.
Instructing her how to hold the turn and be ready to slack away at command, I laid hold of the mast with my hands and tried to balance it inboard across the rail.
When I thought I had it I cried to her to slack away; but the spar righted, despite my efforts, and dropped back toward the water.
Again I heaved it up to its old position, for I had now another idea.
I remembered the watch-tackle - a small double and single block affair - and fetched it.
While I was rigging it between the top of the spar and the opposite rail, Wolf Larsen came on the scene.
We exchanged nothing more than good-mornings, and, though he could not see, he sat on the rail out of the way and followed by the sound all that I did.
Again instructing Maud to slack away at the windlass when I gave the word, I proceeded to heave on the watch-tackle.
Slowly the mast swung in until it balanced at right angles across the rail; and then I discovered to my amazement that there was no need for Maud to slack away.
In fact, the very opposite was necessary.
Making the watch-tackle fast, I hove on the windlass and brought in the mast, inch by inch, till its top tilted down to the deck and finally its whole length lay on the deck.
I looked at my watch.
It was twelve o'clock.
My back was aching sorely, and I felt extremely tired and hungry.
And there on the deck was a single stick of timber to show for a whole morning's work.
For the first time I thoroughly realized the extent of the task before us.
But I was learning, I was learning.
The afternoon would show far more accomplished.
And it did; for we returned at one o'clock, rested and strengthened by a hearty dinner.
In less than an hour I had the maintopmast on deck and was constructing the shears.
Lashing the two topmasts together, and making allowance for their unequal length, at the point of intersection I attached the double block of the main throat-halyards.
This, with the single block and the throat-halyards themselves, gave me a hoisting tackle.
To prevent the butts of the masts from slipping on the deck, I nailed down thick cleats.
Everything in readiness, I made a line fast to the apex of the shears and carried it directly to the windlass.
I was growing to have faith in that windlass, for it gave me power beyond all expectation.
As usual, Maud held the turn while I heaved.
The shears rose in the air.
Then I discovered I had forgotten guy-ropes.
This necessitated my climbing the shears, which I did twice, before I finished guying it fore and aft and to either side.
Twilight had set in by the time this was accomplished.
Wolf Larsen, who had sat about and listened all afternoon and never opened his mouth, had taken himself off to the galley and started his supper.
I felt quite stiff across the small of the back, so much so that I straightened up with an effort and with pain.
I looked proudly at my work.
It was beginning to show.
I was wild with desire, like a child with a new toy, to hoist something with my shears.
"I wish it weren't so late," I said.
"I'd like to see how it works."
"Don't be a glutton, Humphrey," Maud chided me.
"Remember, to-morrow is coming, and you're so tired now that you can hardly stand."
"And you?"
I said, with sudden solicitude.
"You must be very tired.
You have worked hard and nobly.
I am proud of you, Maud."
"Not half so proud as I am of you, nor with half the reason," she answered, looking me straight in the eyes for a moment with an expression in her own and a dancing, tremulous light which I had not seen before and which gave me a pang of quick delight, I know not why, for I did not understand it.
Then she dropped her eyes, to lift them again, laughing.
"If our friends could see us now," she said.
"Look at us.
Have you ever paused for a moment to consider our appearance?"
"Yes, I have considered yours, frequently," I answered, puzzling over what I had seen in her eyes and puzzled by her sudden change of subject.
"Mercy!"
she cried.
"And what do I look like, pray?"
"A scarecrow, I'm afraid," I replied.
"Just glance at your draggled skirts, for instance.
Look at those three-cornered tears.
And such a waist!
It would not require a Sherlock Holmes to deduce that you have been cooking over a camp-fire, to say nothing of trying out seal-blubber.
And to cap it all, that cap!
And all that is the woman who wrote 'A Kiss Endured.'"
She made me an elaborate and stately courtesy, and said, "As for you, sir - "
And yet, through the five minutes of banter which followed, there was a serious something underneath the fun which I could not but relate to the strange and fleeting expression I had caught in her eyes.
What was it?
Could it be that our eyes were speaking beyond the will of our speech?
My eyes had spoken, I knew, until I had found the culprits out and silenced them.
This had occurred several times.
But had she seen the clamour in them and understood?
And had her eyes so spoken to me?
What else could that expression have meant - that dancing, tremulous light, and a something more which words could not describe.
And yet it could not be.
It was impossible.
Besides, I was not skilled in the speech of eyes.
I was only Humphrey Van Weyden, a bookish fellow who loved.
And to love, and to wait and win love, that surely was glorious enough for me.
And thus I thought, even as we chaffed each other's appearance, until we arrived ashore and there were other things to think about.
"It's a shame, after working hard all day, that we cannot have an uninterrupted night's sleep," I complained, after supper.
"But there can be no danger now?
from a blind man?"
she queried.
"I shall never be able to trust him," I averred, "and far less now that he is blind.
The liability is that his part helplessness will make him more malignant than ever.
I know what I shall do to-morrow, the first thing - run out a light anchor and kedge the schooner off the beach.
And each night when we come ashore in the boat, Mr. Wolf Larsen will be left a prisoner on board.
So this will be the last night we have to stand watch, and because of that it will go the easier."
We were awake early and just finishing breakfast as daylight came.
"Oh, Humphrey!"
I heard Maud cry in dismay and suddenly stop.
I looked at her.
She was gazing at the Ghost.
I followed her gaze, but could see nothing unusual.
She looked at me, and I looked inquiry back.
"The shears," she said, and her voice trembled.
I had forgotten their existence.
I looked again, but could not see them.
"If he has - " I muttered savagely.
She put her hand sympathetically on mine, and said, "You will have to begin over again."
"Oh, believe me, my anger means nothing; I could not hurt a fly," I smiled back bitterly.
"And the worst of it is, he knows it.
You are right.
If he has destroyed the shears, I shall do nothing except begin over again."
"But I'll stand my watch on board hereafter," I blurted out a moment later.
"And if he interferes - "
"But I dare not stay ashore all night alone," Maud was saying when I came back to myself.
"It would be so much nicer if he would be friendly with us and help us.
We could all live comfortably aboard."
"We will," I asserted, still savagely, for the destruction of my beloved shears had hit me hard.
"That is, you and I will live aboard, friendly or not with Wolf Larsen."
"It's childish," I laughed later, "for him to do such things, and for me to grow angry over them, for that matter."
But my heart smote me when we climbed aboard and looked at the havoc he had done.
The shears were gone altogether.
The guys had been slashed right and left.
The throat-halyards which I had rigged were cut across through every part.
And he knew I could not splice.
A thought struck me.
I ran to the windlass.
It would not work.
He had broken it.
We looked at each other in consternation.
Then I ran to the side.
The masts, booms, and gaffs I had cleared were gone.
He had found the lines which held them, and cast them adrift.
Tears were in Maud's eyes, and I do believe they were for me.
I could have wept myself.
Where now was our project of remasting the Ghost?
He had done his work well.
I sat down on the hatch-combing and rested my chin on my hands in black despair.
"He deserves to die," I cried out; "and God forgive me, I am not man enough to be his executioner."
But Maud was by my side, passing her hand soothingly through my hair as though I were a child, and saying, "There, there; it will all come right.
We are in the right, and it must come right."
I remembered Michelet and leaned my head against her; and truly I became strong again.
The blessed woman was an unfailing fount of power to me.
What did it matter?
Only a set-back, a delay.
The tide could not have carried the masts far to seaward, and there had been no wind.
It meant merely more work to find them and tow them back.
And besides, it was a lesson.
I knew what to expect.
He might have waited and destroyed our work more effectually when we had more accomplished.
"Here he comes now," she whispered.
I glanced up.
He was strolling leisurely along the poop on the port side.
"Take no notice of him," I whispered.
"He's coming to see how we take it.
Don't let him know that we know.
We can deny him that satisfaction.
Take off your shoes - that's right - and carry them in your hand."
And then we played hide-and-seek with the blind man.
As he came up the port side we slipped past on the starboard; and from the poop we watched him turn and start aft on our track.
He must have known, somehow, that we were on board, for he said "Good-morning" very confidently, and waited, for the greeting to be returned.
Then he strolled aft, and we slipped forward.
"Oh, I know you're aboard," he called out, and I could see him listen intently after he had spoken.
It reminded me of the great hoot-owl, listening, after its booming cry, for the stir of its frightened prey.
But we did not stir, and we moved only when he moved.
And so we dodged about the deck, hand in hand, like a couple of children chased by a wicked ogre, till Wolf Larsen, evidently in disgust, left the deck for the cabin.
There was glee in our eyes, and suppressed titters in our mouths, as we put on our shoes and clambered over the side into the boat.
And as I looked into Maud's clear brown eyes I forgot the evil he had done, and I knew only that I loved her, and that because of her the strength was mine to win our way back to the world.
For two days Maud and I ranged the sea and explored the beaches in search of the missing masts.
But it was not till the third day that we found them, all of them, the shears included, and, of all perilous places, in the pounding surf of the grim south-western promontory.
And how we worked!
At the dark end of the first day we returned, exhausted, to our little cove, towing the mainmast behind us.
And we had been compelled to row, in a dead calm, practically every inch of the way.
Another day of heart-breaking and dangerous toil saw us in camp with the two topmasts to the good.
The day following I was desperate, and I rafted together the foremast, the fore and main booms, and the fore and main gaffs.
The wind was favourable, and I had thought to tow them back under sail, but the wind baffled, then died away, and our progress with the oars was a snail's pace.
And it was such dispiriting effort.
To throw one's whole strength and weight on the oars and to feel the boat checked in its forward lunge by the heavy drag behind, was not exactly exhilarating.
Night began to fall, and to make matters worse, the wind sprang up ahead.
Not only did all forward motion cease, but we began to drift back and out to sea.
I struggled at the oars till I was played out.
Poor Maud, whom I could never prevent from working to the limit of her strength, lay weakly back in the stern-sheets.
I could row no more.
My bruised and swollen hands could no longer close on the oar handles.
My wrists and arms ached intolerably, and though I had eaten heartily of a twelve-o'clock lunch, I had worked so hard that I was faint from hunger.
I pulled in the oars and bent forward to the line which held the tow.
But Maud's hand leaped out restrainingly to mine.
"What are you going to do?"
she asked in a strained, tense voice.
"Cast it off," I answered, slipping a turn of the rope.
But her fingers closed on mine.
"Please don't," she begged.
"It is useless," I answered.
"Here is night and the wind blowing us off the land."
"But think, Humphrey.
If we cannot sail away on the Ghost, we may remain for years on the island - for life even.
If it has never been discovered all these years, it may never be discovered."
"You forget the boat we found on the beach," I reminded her.
"It was a seal-hunting boat," she replied, "and you know perfectly well that if the men had escaped they would have been back to make their fortunes from the rookery.
You know they never escaped."
I remained silent, undecided.
"Besides," she added haltingly, "it's your idea, and I want to see you succeed."
Now I could harden my heart.
As soon as she put it on a flattering personal basis, generosity compelled me to deny her.
"Better years on the island than to die to-night, or to-morrow, or the next day, in the open boat.
We are not prepared to brave the sea.
We have no food, no water, no blankets, nothing.
Why, you'd not survive the night without blankets: I know how strong you are.
You are shivering now."
"It is only nervousness," she answered.
"I am afraid you will cast off the masts in spite of me."
"Oh, please, please, Humphrey, don't!"
she burst out, a moment later.
And so it ended, with the phrase she knew had all power over me.
We shivered miserably throughout the night.
Now and again I fitfully slept, but the pain of the cold always aroused me.
How Maud could stand it was beyond me.
I was too tired to thrash my arms about and warm myself, but I found strength time and again to chafe her hands and feet to restore the circulation.
And still she pleaded with me not to cast off the masts.
About three in the morning she was caught by a cold cramp, and after I had rubbed her out of that she became quite numb.
I was frightened.
I got out the oars and made her row, though she was so weak I thought she would faint at every stroke.
Morning broke, and we looked long in the growing light for our island.
At last it showed, small and black, on the horizon, fully fifteen miles away.
I scanned the sea with my glasses.
Far away in the south-west I could see a dark line on the water, which grew even as I looked at it.
"Fair wind!"
I cried in a husky voice I did not recognize as my own.
Maud tried to reply, but could not speak.
Her lips were blue with cold, and she was hollow-eyed - but oh, how bravely her brown eyes looked at me!
How piteously brave!
Again I fell to chafing her hands and to moving her arms up and down and about until she could thrash them herself.
Then I compelled her to stand up, and though she would have fallen had I not supported her, I forced her to walk back and forth the several steps between the thwart and the stern-sheets, and finally to spring up and down.
"Oh, you brave, brave woman," I said, when I saw the life coming back into her face.
"Did you know that you were brave?"
"I never used to be," she answered.
"I was never brave till I knew you.
It is you who have made me brave."
"Nor I, until I knew you," I answered.
She gave me a quick look, and again I caught that dancing, tremulous light and something more in her eyes.
But it was only for the moment.
Then she smiled.
"It must have been the conditions," she said; but I knew she was wrong, and I wondered if she likewise knew.
Then the wind came, fair and fresh, and the boat was soon labouring through a heavy sea toward the island.
At half-past three in the afternoon we passed the south-western promontory.
Not only were we hungry, but we were now suffering from thirst.
Our lips were dry and cracked, nor could we longer moisten them with our tongues.
Then the wind slowly died down.
By night it was dead calm and I was toiling once more at the oars - but weakly, most weakly.
At two in the morning the boat's bow touched the beach of our own inner cove and I staggered out to make the painter fast.
Maud could not stand, nor had I strength to carry her.
I fell in the sand with her, and, when I had recovered, contented myself with putting my hands under her shoulders and dragging her up the beach to the hut.
The next day we did no work.
In fact, we slept till three in the afternoon, or at least I did, for I awoke to find Maud cooking dinner.
Her power of recuperation was wonderful.
There was something tenacious about that lily-frail body of hers, a clutch on existence which one could not reconcile with its patent weakness.
"You know I was travelling to Japan for my health," she said, as we lingered at the fire after dinner and delighted in the movelessness of loafing.
"I was not very strong.
I never was.
The doctors recommended a sea voyage, and I chose the longest."
"You little knew what you were choosing," I laughed.
"But I shall be a different women for the experience, as well as a stronger woman," she answered; "and, I hope a better woman.
At least I shall understand a great deal more of life."
Then, as the short day waned, we fell to discussing Wolf Larsen's blindness.
It was inexplicable.
And that it was grave, I instanced his statement that he intended to stay and die on Endeavour Island.
When he, strong man that he was, loving life as he did, accepted his death, it was plain that he was troubled by something more than mere blindness.
There had been his terrific headaches, and we were agreed that it was some sort of brain break-down, and that in his attacks he endured pain beyond our comprehension.
I noticed as we talked over his condition, that Maud's sympathy went out to him more and more; yet I could not but love her for it, so sweetly womanly was it.
Besides, there was no false sentiment about her feeling.
She was agreed that the most rigorous treatment was necessary if we were to escape, though she recoiled at the suggestion that I might some time be compelled to take his life to save my own - "our own," she put it.
In the morning we had breakfast and were at work by daylight.
I found a light kedge anchor in the fore-hold, where such things were kept; and with a deal of exertion got it on deck and into the boat.
With a long running-line coiled down in the stem, I rowed well out into our little cove and dropped the anchor into the water.
There was no wind, the tide was high, and the schooner floated.
Casting off the shore-lines, I kedged her out by main strength (the windlass being broken), till she rode nearly up and down to the small anchor - too small to hold her in any breeze.
So I lowered the big starboard anchor, giving plenty of slack; and by afternoon I was at work on the windlass.
Three days I worked on that windlass.
Least of all things was I a mechanic, and in that time I accomplished what an ordinary machinist would have done in as many hours.
I had to learn my tools to begin with, and every simple mechanical principle which such a man would have at his finger ends I had likewise to learn.
And at the end of three days I had a windlass which worked clumsily.
It never gave the satisfaction the old windlass had given, but it worked and made my work possible.
In half a day I got the two topmasts aboard and the shears rigged and guyed as before.
And that night I slept on board and on deck beside my work.
Maud, who refused to stay alone ashore, slept in the forecastle.
Wolf Larsen had sat about, listening to my repairing the windlass and talking with Maud and me upon indifferent subjects.
No reference was made on either side to the destruction of the shears; nor did he say anything further about my leaving his ship alone.
But still I had feared him, blind and helpless and listening, always listening, and I never let his strong arms get within reach of me while I worked.
On this night, sleeping under my beloved shears, I was aroused by his footsteps on the deck.
It was a starlight night, and I could see the bulk of him dimly as he moved about.
I rolled out of my blankets and crept noiselessly after him in my stocking feet.
He had armed himself with a draw-knife from the tool-locker, and with this he prepared to cut across the throat-halyards I had again rigged to the shears.
He felt the halyards with his hands and discovered that I had not made them fast.
This would not do for a draw-knife, so he laid hold of the running part, hove taut, and made fast.
Then he prepared to saw across with the draw-knife.
"I wouldn't, if I were you," I said quietly.
He heard the click of my pistol and laughed.
"Hello, Hump," he said.
"I knew you were here all the time.
You can't fool my ears."
"That's a lie, Wolf Larsen," I said, just as quietly as before.
"However, I am aching for a chance to kill you, so go ahead and cut."
"You have the chance always," he sneered.
"Go ahead and cut," I threatened ominously.
"I'd rather disappoint you," he laughed, and turned on his heel and went aft.
"Something must be done, Humphrey," Maud said, next morning, when I had told her of the night's occurrence.
"If he has liberty, he may do anything.
He may sink the vessel, or set fire to it.
There is no telling what he may do.
We must make him a prisoner."
"But how?"
I asked, with a helpless shrug.
"I dare not come within reach of his arms, and he knows that so long as his resistance is passive I cannot shoot him."
"There must be some way," she contended.
"Let me think."
"There is one way," I said grimly.
She waited.
I picked up a seal-club.
"It won't kill him," I said.
"And before he could recover I'd have him bound hard and fast."
She shook her head with a shudder.
"No, not that.
There must be some less brutal way.
Let us wait."
But we did not have to wait long, and the problem solved itself.
In the morning, after several trials, I found the point of balance in the foremast and attached my hoisting tackle a few feet above it.
Maud held the turn on the windlass and coiled down while I heaved.
Had the windlass been in order it would not have been so difficult; as it was, I was compelled to apply all my weight and strength to every inch of the heaving.
I had to rest frequently.
In truth, my spells of resting were longer than those of working.
Maud even contrived, at times when all my efforts could not budge the windlass, to hold the turn with one hand and with the other to throw the weight of her slim body to my assistance.
At the end of an hour the single and double blocks came together at the top of the shears.
I could hoist no more.
And yet the mast was not swung entirely inboard.
The butt rested against the outside of the port rail, while the top of the mast overhung the water far beyond the starboard rail.
My shears were too short.
All my work had been for nothing.
But I no longer despaired in the old way.
I was acquiring more confidence in myself and more confidence in the possibilities of windlasses, shears, and hoisting tackles.
There was a way in which it could be done, and it remained for me to find that way.
While I was considering the problem, Wolf Larsen came on deck.
We noticed something strange about him at once.
The indecisiveness, or feebleness, of his movements was more pronounced.
His walk was actually tottery as he came down the port side of the cabin.
At the break of the poop he reeled, raised one hand to his eyes with the familiar brushing gesture, and fell down the steps - still on his feet - to the main deck, across which he staggered, falling and flinging out his arms for support.
He regained his balance by the steerage companion-way and stood there dizzily for a space, when he suddenly crumpled up and collapsed, his legs bending under him as he sank to the deck.
"One of his attacks," I whispered to Maud.
She nodded her head; and I could see sympathy warm in her eyes.
We went up to him, but he seemed unconscious, breathing spasmodically.
She took charge of him, lifting his head to keep the blood out of it and despatching me to the cabin for a pillow.
I also brought blankets, and we made him comfortable.
I took his pulse.
It beat steadily and strong, and was quite normal.
This puzzled me.
I became suspicious.
"What if he should be feigning this?"
I asked, still holding his wrist.
Maud shook her head, and there was reproof in her eyes.
But just then the wrist I held leaped from my hand, and the hand clasped like a steel trap about my wrist.
I cried aloud in awful fear, a wild inarticulate cry; and I caught one glimpse of his face, malignant and triumphant, as his other hand compassed my body and I was drawn down to him in a terrible grip.
My wrist was released, but his other arm, passed around my back, held both my arms so that I could not move.
His free hand went to my throat, and in that moment I knew the bitterest foretaste of death earned by one's own idiocy.
Why had I trusted myself within reach of those terrible arms?
I could feel other hands at my throat.
They were Maud's hands, striving vainly to tear loose the hand that was throttling me.
She gave it up, and I heard her scream in a way that cut me to the soul, for it was a woman's scream of fear and heart-breaking despair.
I had heard it before, during the sinking of the Martinez.
My face was against his chest and I could not see, but I heard Maud turn and run swiftly away along the deck.
Everything was happening quickly.
I had not yet had a glimmering of unconsciousness, and it seemed that an interminable period of time was lapsing before I heard her feet flying back.
And just then I felt the whole man sink under me.
The breath was leaving his lungs and his chest was collapsing under my weight.
Whether it was merely the expelled breath, or his consciousness of his growing impotence, I know not, but his throat vibrated with a deep groan.
The hand at my throat relaxed.
I breathed.
It fluttered and tightened again.
But even his tremendous will could not overcome the dissolution that assailed it.
That will of his was breaking down.
He was fainting.
Maud's footsteps were very near as his hand fluttered for the last time and my throat was released.
I rolled off and over to the deck on my back, gasping and blinking in the sunshine.
Maud was pale but composed, - my eyes had gone instantly to her face, - and she was looking at me with mingled alarm and relief.
A heavy seal-club in her hand caught my eyes, and at that moment she followed my gaze down to it.
The club dropped from her hand as though it had suddenly stung her, and at the same moment my heart surged with a great joy.
Truly she was my woman, my mate-woman, fighting with me and for me as the mate of a caveman would have fought, all the primitive in her aroused, forgetful of her culture, hard under the softening civilization of the only life she had ever known.
"Dear woman!"
I cried, scrambling to my feet.
The next moment she was in my arms, weeping convulsively on my shoulder while I clasped her close.
I looked down at the brown glory of her hair, glinting gems in the sunshine far more precious to me than those in the treasure-chests of kings.
And I bent my head and kissed her hair softly, so softly that she did not know.
Then sober thought came to me.
After all, she was only a woman, crying her relief, now that the danger was past, in the arms of her protector or of the one who had been endangered.
Had I been father or brother, the situation would have been in nowise different.
Besides, time and place were not meet, and I wished to earn a better right to declare my love.
So once again I softly kissed her hair as I felt her receding from my clasp.
"It was a real attack this time," I said: "another shock like the one that made him blind.
He feigned at first, and in doing so brought it on."
Maud was already rearranging his pillow.
"No," I said, "not yet.
Now that I have him helpless, helpless he shall remain.
From this day we live in the cabin.
Wolf Larsen shall live in the steerage."
I caught him under the shoulders and dragged him to the companion-way.
At my direction Maud fetched a rope.
Placing this under his shoulders, I balanced him across the threshold and lowered him down the steps to the floor.
I could not lift him directly into a bunk, but with Maud's help I lifted first his shoulders and head, then his body, balanced him across the edge, and rolled him into a lower bunk.
But this was not to be all.
I recollected the handcuffs in his state-room, which he preferred to use on sailors instead of the ancient and clumsy ship irons.
So, when we left him, he lay handcuffed hand and foot.
For the first time in many days I breathed freely.
I felt strangely light as I came on deck, as though a weight had been lifted off my shoulders.
I felt, also, that Maud and I had drawn more closely together.
And I wondered if she, too, felt it, as we walked along the deck side by side to where the stalled foremast hung in the shears.
At once we moved aboard the Ghost, occupying our old state-rooms and cooking in the galley.
The imprisonment of Wolf Larsen had happened most opportunely, for what must have been the Indian summer of this high latitude was gone and drizzling stormy weather had set in.
We were very comfortable, and the inadequate shears, with the foremast suspended from them, gave a business-like air to the schooner and a promise of departure.
And now that we had Wolf Larsen in irons, how little did we need it!
Like his first attack, his second had been accompanied by serious disablement.
Maud made the discovery in the afternoon while trying to give him nourishment.
He had shown signs of consciousness, and she had spoken to him, eliciting no response.
He was lying on his left side at the time, and in evident pain.
With a restless movement he rolled his head around, clearing his left ear from the pillow against which it had been pressed.
At once he heard and answered her, and at once she came to me.
Pressing the pillow against his left ear, I asked him if he heard me, but he gave no sign.
Removing the pillow and, repeating the question he answered promptly that he did.
"Do you know you are deaf in the right ear?"
I asked.
"Yes," he answered in a low, strong voice, "and worse than that.
My whole right side is affected.
It seems asleep.
I cannot move arm or leg."
"Feigning again?"
I demanded angrily.
He shook his head, his stern mouth shaping the strangest, twisted smile.
It was indeed a twisted smile, for it was on the left side only, the facial muscles of the right side moving not at all.
"That was the last play of the Wolf," he said.
"I am paralysed.
I shall never walk again.
Oh, only on the other side," he added, as though divining the suspicious glance I flung at his left leg, the knee of which had just then drawn up, and elevated the blankets.
"It's unfortunate," he continued.
"I'd liked to have done for you first, Hump.
And I thought I had that much left in me."
"But why?"
I asked; partly in horror, partly out of curiosity.
Again his stern mouth framed the twisted smile, as he said:
"Oh, just to be alive, to be living and doing, to be the biggest bit of the ferment to the end, to eat you.
But to die this way."
He shrugged his shoulders, or attempted to shrug them, rather, for the left shoulder alone moved.
Like the smile, the shrug was twisted.
"But how can you account for it?"
I asked.
"Where is the seat of your trouble?"
"The brain," he said at once.
"It was those cursed headaches brought it on."
"Symptoms," I said.
He nodded his head.
"There is no accounting for it.
I was never sick in my life.
Something's gone wrong with my brain.
A cancer, a tumour, or something of that nature, - a thing that devours and destroys.
It's attacking my nerve-centres, eating them up, bit by bit, cell by cell - from the pain."
"The motor-centres, too," I suggested.
"So it would seem; and the curse of it is that I must lie here, conscious, mentally unimpaired, knowing that the lines are going down, breaking bit by bit communication with the world.
I cannot see, hearing and feeling are leaving me, at this rate I shall soon cease to speak; yet all the time I shall be here, alive, active, and powerless."
"When you say you are here, I'd suggest the likelihood of the soul," I said.
"Bosh!"
was his retort.
"It simply means that in the attack on my brain the higher psychical centres are untouched.
I can remember, I can think and reason.
When that goes, I go.
I am not.
The soul?"
He broke out in mocking laughter, then turned his left ear to the pillow as a sign that he wished no further conversation.
Maud and I went about our work oppressed by the fearful fate which had overtaken him, - how fearful we were yet fully to realize.
There was the awfulness of retribution about it.
Our thoughts were deep and solemn, and we spoke to each other scarcely above whispers.
"You might remove the handcuffs," he said that night, as we stood in consultation over him.
"It's dead safe.
I'm a paralytic now.
The next thing to watch out for is bed sores."
He smiled his twisted smile, and Maud, her eyes wide with horror, was compelled to turn away her head.
"Do you know that your smile is crooked?"
I asked him; for I knew that she must attend him, and I wished to save her as much as possible.
"Then I shall smile no more," he said calmly.
"I thought something was wrong.
My right cheek has been numb all day.
Yes, and I've had warnings of this for the last three days; by spells, my right side seemed going to sleep, sometimes arm or hand, sometimes leg or foot."
"So my smile is crooked?"
he queried a short while after.
"Well, consider henceforth that I smile internally, with my soul, if you please, my soul.
Consider that I am smiling now."
And for the space of several minutes he lay there, quiet, indulging his grotesque fancy.
The man of him was not changed.
It was the old, indomitable, terrible Wolf Larsen, imprisoned somewhere within that flesh which had once been so invincible and splendid.
Now it bound him with insentient fetters, walling his soul in darkness and silence, blocking it from the world which to him had been a riot of action.
No more would he conjugate the verb "to do in every mood and tense."
"To be" was all that remained to him - to be, as he had defined death, without movement; to will, but not to execute; to think and reason and in the spirit of him to be as alive as ever, but in the flesh to be dead, quite dead.
And yet, though I even removed the handcuffs, we could not adjust ourselves to his condition.
Our minds revolted.
To us he was full of potentiality.
We knew not what to expect of him next, what fearful thing, rising above the flesh, he might break out and do.
Our experience warranted this state of mind, and we went about our work with anxiety always upon us.
I had solved the problem which had arisen through the shortness of the shears.
By means of the watch-tackle (I had made a new one), I heaved the butt of the foremast across the rail and then lowered it to the deck.
Next, by means of the shears, I hoisted the main boom on board.
Its forty feet of length would supply the height necessary properly to swing the mast.
By means of a secondary tackle I had attached to the shears, I swung the boom to a nearly perpendicular position, then lowered the butt to the deck, where, to prevent slipping, I spiked great cleats around it.
The single block of my original shears-tackle I had attached to the end of the boom.
Thus, by carrying this tackle to the windlass, I could raise and lower the end of the boom at will, the butt always remaining stationary, and, by means of guys, I could swing the boom from side to side.
To the end of the boom I had likewise rigged a hoisting tackle; and when the whole arrangement was completed I could not but be startled by the power and latitude it gave me.
Of course, two days' work was required for the accomplishment of this part of my task, and it was not till the morning of the third day that I swung the foremast from the deck and proceeded to square its butt to fit the step.
Here I was especially awkward.
I sawed and chopped and chiselled the weathered wood till it had the appearance of having been gnawed by some gigantic mouse.
But it fitted.
"It will work, I know it will work," I cried.
"Do you know Dr. Jordan's final test of truth?"
Maud asked.
I shook my head and paused in the act of dislodging the shavings which had drifted down my neck.
"Can we make it work?
Can we trust our lives to it?
is the test."
"He is a favourite of yours," I said.
"When I dismantled my old Pantheon and cast out Napoleon and Caesar and their fellows, I straightway erected a new Pantheon," she answered gravely, "and the first I installed was Dr.
Jordan."
"A modern hero."
"And a greater because modern," she added.
"How can the Old World heroes compare with ours?"
I shook my head.
We were too much alike in many things for argument.
Our points of view and outlook on life at least were very alike.
"For a pair of critics we agree famously," I laughed.
"And as shipwright and able assistant," she laughed back.
But there was little time for laughter in those days, what of our heavy work and of the awfulness of Wolf Larsen's living death.
He had received another stroke.
He had lost his voice, or he was losing it.
He had only intermittent use of it.
As he phrased it, the wires were like the stock market, now up, now down.
Occasionally the wires were up and he spoke as well as ever, though slowly and heavily.
Then speech would suddenly desert him, in the middle of a sentence perhaps, and for hours, sometimes, we would wait for the connection to be re-established.
He complained of great pain in his head, and it was during this period that he arranged a system of communication against the time when speech should leave him altogether - one pressure of the hand for "yes," two for "no."
It was well that it was arranged, for by evening his voice had gone from him.
By hand pressures, after that, he answered our questions, and when he wished to speak he scrawled his thoughts with his left hand, quite legibly, on a sheet of paper.
The fierce winter had now descended upon us.
Gale followed gale, with snow and sleet and rain.
The seals had started on their great southern migration, and the rookery was practically deserted.
I worked feverishly.
In spite of the bad weather, and of the wind which especially hindered me, I was on deck from daylight till dark and making substantial progress.
I profited by my lesson learned through raising the shears and then climbing them to attach the guys.
To the top of the foremast, which was just lifted conveniently from the deck, I attached the rigging, stays and throat and peak halyards.
As usual, I had underrated the amount of work involved in this portion of the task, and two long days were necessary to complete it.
And there was so much yet to be done - the sails, for instance, which practically had to be made over.
While I toiled at rigging the foremast, Maud sewed on canvas, ready always to drop everything and come to my assistance when more hands than two were required.
The canvas was heavy and hard, and she sewed with the regular sailor's palm and three-cornered sail-needle.
Her hands were soon sadly blistered, but she struggled bravely on, and in addition doing the cooking and taking care of the sick man.
"A fig for superstition," I said on Friday morning.
"That mast goes in to-day."
Everything was ready for the attempt.
Carrying the boom-tackle to the windlass, I hoisted the mast nearly clear of the deck.
Making this tackle fast, I took to the windlass the shears-tackle (which was connected with the end of the boom), and with a few turns had the mast perpendicular and clear.
Maud clapped her hands the instant she was relieved from holding the turn, crying:
"It works!
It works!
We'll trust our lives to it!"
Then she assumed a rueful expression.
"It's not over the hole," she add.
"Will you have to begin all over?"
I smiled in superior fashion, and, slacking off on one of the boom-guys and taking in on the other, swung the mast perfectly in the centre of the deck.
Still it was not over the hole.
Again the rueful expression came on her face, and again I smiled in a superior way.
Slacking away on the boom-tackle and hoisting an equivalent amount on the shears-tackle, I brought the butt of the mast into position directly over the hole in the deck.
Then I gave Maud careful instructions for lowering away and went into the hold to the step on the schooner's bottom.
I called to her, and the mast moved easily and accurately.
Straight toward the square hole of the step the square butt descended; but as it descended it slowly twisted so that square would not fit into square.
But I had not even a moment's indecision.
Calling to Maud to cease lowering, I went on deck and made the watch-tackle fast to the mast with a rolling hitch.
I left Maud to pull on it while I went below.
By the light of the lantern I saw the butt twist slowly around till its sides coincided with the sides of the step.
Maud made fast and returned to the windlass.
Slowly the butt descended the several intervening inches, at the same time slightly twisting again.
Again Maud rectified the twist with the watch-tackle, and again she lowered away from the windlass.
Square fitted into square.
The mast was stepped.
I raised a shout, and she ran down to see.
In the yellow lantern light we peered at what we had accomplished.
We looked at each other, and our hands felt their way and clasped.
The eyes of both of us, I think, were moist with the joy of success.
"It was done so easily after all," I remarked.
"All the work was in the preparation."
"And all the wonder in the completion," Maud added.
"I can scarcely bring myself to realize that that great mast is really up and in; that you have lifted it from the water, swung it through the air, and deposited it here where it belongs.
It is a Titan's task."
"And they made themselves many inventions," I began merrily, then paused to sniff the air.
I looked hastily at the lantern.
It was not smoking.
Again I sniffed.
"Something is burning," Maud said, with sudden conviction.
We sprang together for the ladder, but I raced past her to the deck.
A dense volume of smoke was pouring out of the steerage companion-way.
"The Wolf is not yet dead," I muttered to myself as I sprang down through the smoke.
It was so thick in the confined space that I was compelled to feel my way; and so potent was the spell of Wolf Larsen on my imagination, I was quite prepared for the helpless giant to grip my neck in a strangle hold.
I hesitated, the desire to race back and up the steps to the deck almost overpowering me.
Then I recollected Maud.
The vision of her, as I had last seen her, in the lantern light of the schooner's hold, her brown eyes warm and moist with joy, flashed before me, and I knew that I could not go back.
I was choking and suffocating by the time I reached Wolf Larsen's bunk.
I reached my hand and felt for his.
He was lying motionless, but moved slightly at the touch of my hand.
I felt over and under his blankets.
There was no warmth, no sign of fire.
Yet that smoke which blinded me and made me cough and gasp must have a source.
I lost my head temporarily and dashed frantically about the steerage.
A collision with the table partially knocked the wind from my body and brought me to myself.
I reasoned that a helpless man could start a fire only near to where he lay.
I returned to Wolf Larsen's bunk.
There I encountered Maud.
How long she had been there in that suffocating atmosphere I could not guess.
"Go up on deck!"
I commanded peremptorily.
"But, Humphrey - " she began to protest in a queer, husky voice.
"Please!
please!"
I shouted at her harshly.
She drew away obediently, and then I thought, What if she cannot find the steps?
I started after her, to stop at the foot of the companion-way.
Perhaps she had gone up.
As I stood there, hesitant, I heard her cry softly:
"Oh, Humphrey, I am lost."
I found her fumbling at the wall of the after bulkhead, and, half leading her, half carrying her, I took her up the companion-way.
The pure air was like nectar.
Maud was only faint and dizzy, and I left her lying on the deck when I took my second plunge below.
The source of the smoke must be very close to Wolf Larsen - my mind was made up to this, and I went straight to his bunk.
As I felt about among his blankets, something hot fell on the back of my hand.
It burned me, and I jerked my hand away.
Then I understood.
Through the cracks in the bottom of the upper bunk he had set fire to the mattress.
He still retained sufficient use of his left arm to do this.
The damp straw of the mattress, fired from beneath and denied air, had been smouldering all the while.
As I dragged the mattress out of the bunk it seemed to disintegrate in mid-air, at the same time bursting into flames.
I beat out the burning remnants of straw in the bunk, then made a dash for the deck for fresh air.
Several buckets of water sufficed to put out the burning mattress in the middle of the steerage floor; and ten minutes later, when the smoke had fairly cleared, I allowed Maud to come below.
Wolf Larsen was unconscious, but it was a matter of minutes for the fresh air to restore him.
We were working over him, however, when he signed for paper and pencil.
"Pray do not interrupt me," he wrote.
"I am smiling."
"I am still a bit of the ferment, you see," he wrote a little later.
"I am glad you are as small a bit as you are," I said.
"Thank you," he wrote.
"But just think of how much smaller I shall be before I die."
"And yet I am all here, Hump," he wrote with a final flourish.
"I can think more clearly than ever in my life before.
Nothing to disturb me.
Concentration is perfect.
I am all here and more than here."
It was like a message from the night of the grave; for this man's body had become his mausoleum.
And there, in so strange sepulchre, his spirit fluttered and lived.
It would flutter and live till the last line of communication was broken, and after that who was to say how much longer it might continue to flutter and live?
"I think my left side is going," Wolf Larsen wrote, the morning after his attempt to fire the ship.
"The numbness is growing.
I can hardly move my hand.
You will have to speak louder.
The last lines are going down."
"Are you in pain?"
I asked.
I was compelled to repeat my question loudly before he answered:
"Not all the time."
The left hand stumbled slowly and painfully across the paper, and it was with extreme difficulty that we deciphered the scrawl.
It was like a "spirit message," such as are delivered at séances of spiritualists for a dollar admission.
"But I am still here, all here," the hand scrawled more slowly and painfully than ever.
The pencil dropped, and we had to replace it in the hand.
"When there is no pain I have perfect peace and quiet.
I have never thought so clearly.
I can ponder life and death like a Hindoo sage."
"And immortality?"
Maud queried loudly in the ear.
Three times the hand essayed to write but fumbled hopelessly.
The pencil fell.
In vain we tried to replace it.
The fingers could not close on it.
Then Maud pressed and held the fingers about the pencil with her own hand and the hand wrote, in large letters, and so slowly that the minutes ticked off to each letter:
"B-O-S-H."
It was Wolf Larsen's last word, "bosh," sceptical and invincible to the end.
The arm and hand relaxed.
The trunk of the body moved slightly.
Then there was no movement.
Maud released the hand.
The fingers spread slightly, falling apart of their own weight, and the pencil rolled away.
"Do you still hear?"
I shouted, holding the fingers and waiting for the single pressure which would signify "Yes."
There was no response.
The hand was dead.
"I noticed the lips slightly move," Maud said.
I repeated the question.
The lips moved.
She placed the tips of her fingers on them.
Again I repeated the question.
"Yes," Maud announced.
We looked at each other expectantly.
"What good is it?"
I asked.
"What can we say now?"
"Oh, ask him - "
She hesitated.
"Ask him something that requires no for an answer," I suggested.
"Then we will know for certainty."
"Are you hungry?"
she cried.
The lips moved under her fingers, and she answered, "Yes."
"Will you have some beef?"
was her next query.
"No," she announced.
"Beef-tea?"
"Yes, he will have some beef-tea," she said, quietly, looking up at me.
"Until his hearing goes we shall be able to communicate with him.
And after that - "
She looked at me queerly.
I saw her lips trembling and the tears swimming up in her eyes.
She swayed toward me and I caught her in my arms.
"Oh, Humphrey," she sobbed, "when will it all end?
I am so tired, so tired."
She buried her head on my shoulder, her frail form shaken with a storm of weeping.
She was like a feather in my arms, so slender, so ethereal.
"She has broken down at last," I thought.
"What can I do without her help?"
But I soothed and comforted her, till she pulled herself bravely together and recuperated mentally as quickly as she was wont to do physically.
"I ought to be ashamed of myself," she said.
Then added, with the whimsical smile I adored, "but I am only one, small woman."
That phrase, the "one small woman," startled me like an electric shock.
It was my own phrase, my pet, secret phrase, my love phrase for her.
"Where did you get that phrase?"
I demanded, with an abruptness that in turn startled her.
"What phrase?"
she asked.
"One small woman."
"Is it yours?"
she asked.
"Yes," I answered.
"Mine.
I made it."
"Then you must have talked in your sleep," she smiled.
The dancing, tremulous light was in her eyes.
Mine, I knew, were speaking beyond the will of my speech.
I leaned toward her.
Without volition I leaned toward her, as a tree is swayed by the wind.
Ah, we were very close together in that moment.
But she shook her head, as one might shake off sleep or a dream, saying:
"I have known it all my life.
It was my father's name for my mother."
"It is my phrase too," I said stubbornly.
"For your mother?"
"No," I answered, and she questioned no further, though I could have sworn her eyes retained for some time a mocking, teasing expression.
With the foremast in, the work now went on apace.
Almost before I knew it, and without one serious hitch, I had the mainmast stepped.
A derrick-boom, rigged to the foremast, had accomplished this; and several days more found all stays and shrouds in place, and everything set up taut.
Topsails would be a nuisance and a danger for a crew of two, so I heaved the topmasts on deck and lashed them fast.
Several more days were consumed in finishing the sails and putting them on.
There were only three - the jib, foresail, and mainsail; and, patched, shortened, and distorted, they were a ridiculously ill-fitting suit for so trim a craft as the Ghost.
"But they'll work!"
Maud cried jubilantly.
"We'll make them work, and trust our lives to them!"
Certainly, among my many new trades, I shone least as a sail-maker.
I could sail them better than make them, and I had no doubt of my power to bring the schooner to some northern port of Japan.
In fact, I had crammed navigation from text-books aboard; and besides, there was Wolf Larsen's star-scale, so simple a device that a child could work it.
As for its inventor, beyond an increasing deafness and the movement of the lips growing fainter and fainter, there had been little change in his condition for a week.
But on the day we finished bending the schooner's sails, he heard his last, and the last movement of his lips died away - but not before I had asked him, "Are you all there?"
and the lips had answered, "Yes."
The last line was down.
Somewhere within that tomb of the flesh still dwelt the soul of the man.
Walled by the living clay, that fierce intelligence we had known burned on; but it burned on in silence and darkness.
And it was disembodied.
To that intelligence there could be no objective knowledge of a body.
It knew no body.
The very world was not.
It knew only itself and the vastness and profundity of the quiet and the dark.
The day came for our departure.
There was no longer anything to detain us on Endeavour Island.
The Ghost's stumpy masts were in place, her crazy sails bent.
All my handiwork was strong, none of it beautiful; but I knew that it would work, and I felt myself a man of power as I looked at it.
"I did it!
I did it!
With my own hands I did it!"
I wanted to cry aloud.
But Maud and I had a way of voicing each other's thoughts, and she said, as we prepared to hoist the mainsail:
"To think, Humphrey, you did it all with your own hands?"
"But there were two other hands," I answered.
"Two small hands, and don't say that was a phrase, also, of your father."
She laughed and shook her head, and held her hands up for inspection.
"I can never get them clean again," she wailed, "nor soften the weather-beat."
"Then dirt and weather-beat shall be your guerdon of honour," I said, holding them in mine; and, spite of my resolutions, I would have kissed the two dear hands had she not swiftly withdrawn them.
Our comradeship was becoming tremulous, I had mastered my love long and well, but now it was mastering me.
Wilfully had it disobeyed and won my eyes to speech, and now it was winning my tongue - ay, and my lips, for they were mad this moment to kiss the two small hands which had toiled so faithfully and hard.
And I, too, was mad.
There was a cry in my being like bugles calling me to her.
And there was a wind blowing upon me which I could not resist, swaying the very body of me till I leaned toward her, all unconscious that I leaned.
And she knew it.
She could not but know it as she swiftly drew away her hands, and yet, could not forbear one quick searching look before she turned away her eyes.
By means of deck-tackles I had arranged to carry the halyards forward to the windlass; and now I hoisted the mainsail, peak and throat, at the same time.
It was a clumsy way, but it did not take long, and soon the foresail as well was up and fluttering.
"We can never get that anchor up in this narrow place, once it has left the bottom," I said.
"We should be on the rocks first."
"What can you do?"
she asked.
"Slip it," was my answer.
"And when I do, you must do your first work on the windlass.
I shall have to run at once to the wheel, and at the same time you must be hoisting the jib."
This manoeuvre of getting under way I had studied and worked out a score of times; and, with the jib-halyard to the windlass, I knew Maud was capable of hoisting that most necessary sail.
A brisk wind was blowing into the cove, and though the water was calm, rapid work was required to get us safely out.
When I knocked the shackle-bolt loose, the chain roared out through the hawse-hole and into the sea.
I raced aft, putting the wheel up.
The Ghost seemed to start into life as she heeled to the first fill of her sails.
The jib was rising.
As it filled, the Ghost's bow swung off and I had to put the wheel down a few spokes and steady her.
I had devised an automatic jib-sheet which passed the jib across of itself, so there was no need for Maud to attend to that; but she was still hoisting the jib when I put the wheel hard down.
It was a moment of anxiety, for the Ghost was rushing directly upon the beach, a stone's throw distant.
But she swung obediently on her heel into the wind.
There was a great fluttering and flapping of canvas and reef-points, most welcome to my ears, then she filled away on the other tack.
Maud had finished her task and come aft, where she stood beside me, a small cap perched on her wind-blown hair, her cheeks flushed from exertion, her eyes wide and bright with the excitement, her nostrils quivering to the rush and bite of the fresh salt air.
Her brown eyes were like a startled deer's.
There was a wild, keen look in them I had never seen before, and her lips parted and her breath suspended as the Ghost, charging upon the wall of rock at the entrance to the inner cove, swept into the wind and filled away into safe water.
My first mate's berth on the sealing grounds stood me in good stead, and I cleared the inner cove and laid a long tack along the shore of the outer cove.
Once again about, and the Ghost headed out to open sea.
She had now caught the bosom-breathing of the ocean, and was herself a-breath with the rhythm of it as she smoothly mounted and slipped down each broad-backed wave.
The day had been dull and overcast, but the sun now burst through the clouds, a welcome omen, and shone upon the curving beach where together we had dared the lords of the harem and slain the holluschickie.
All Endeavour Island brightened under the sun.
Even the grim south-western promontory showed less grim, and here and there, where the sea-spray wet its surface, high lights flashed and dazzled in the sun.
"I shall always think of it with pride," I said to Maud.
She threw her head back in a queenly way but said, "Dear, dear Endeavour Island!
I shall always love it."
"And I," I said quickly.
It seemed our eyes must meet in a great understanding, and yet, loath, they struggled away and did not meet.
There was a silence I might almost call awkward, till I broke it, saying:
"See those black clouds to windward.
You remember, I told you last night the barometer was falling."
"And the sun is gone," she said, her eyes still fixed upon our island, where we had proved our mastery over matter and attained to the truest comradeship that may fall to man and woman.
"And it's slack off the sheets for Japan!"
I cried gaily.
"A fair wind and a flowing sheet, you know, or however it goes."
Lashing the wheel I ran forward, eased the fore and mainsheets, took in on the boom-tackles and trimmed everything for the quartering breeze which was ours.
It was a fresh breeze, very fresh, but I resolved to run as long as I dared.
Unfortunately, when running free, it is impossible to lash the wheel, so I faced an all-night watch.
Maud insisted on relieving me, but proved that she had not the strength to steer in a heavy sea, even if she could have gained the wisdom on such short notice.
She appeared quite heart-broken over the discovery, but recovered her spirits by coiling down tackles and halyards and all stray ropes.
Then there were meals to be cooked in the galley, beds to make, Wolf Larsen to be attended upon, and she finished the day with a grand house-cleaning attack upon the cabin and steerage.
All night I steered, without relief, the wind slowly and steadily increasing and the sea rising.
At five in the morning Maud brought me hot coffee and biscuits she had baked, and at seven a substantial and piping hot breakfast put new lift into me.
Throughout the day, and as slowly and steadily as ever, the wind increased.
It impressed one with its sullen determination to blow, and blow harder, and keep on blowing.
And still the Ghost foamed along, racing off the miles till I was certain she was making at least eleven knots.
It was too good to lose, but by nightfall I was exhausted.
Though in splendid physical trim, a thirty-six-hour trick at the wheel was the limit of my endurance.
Besides, Maud begged me to heave to, and I knew, if the wind and sea increased at the same rate during the night, that it would soon be impossible to heave to.
So, as twilight deepened, gladly and at the same time reluctantly, I brought the Ghost up on the wind.
But I had not reckoned upon the colossal task the reefing of three sails meant for one man.
While running away from the wind I had not appreciated its force, but when we ceased to run I learned to my sorrow, and well-nigh to my despair, how fiercely it was really blowing.
The wind balked my every effort, ripping the canvas out of my hands and in an instant undoing what I had gained by ten minutes of severest struggle.
At eight o'clock I had succeeded only in putting the second reef into the foresail.
At eleven o'clock I was no farther along.
Blood dripped from every finger-end, while the nails were broken to the quick.
From pain and sheer exhaustion I wept in the darkness, secretly, so that Maud should not know.
Then, in desperation, I abandoned the attempt to reef the mainsail and resolved to try the experiment of heaving to under the close-reefed foresail.
Three hours more were required to gasket the mainsail and jib, and at two in the morning, nearly dead, the life almost buffeted and worked out of me, I had barely sufficient consciousness to know the experiment was a success.
The close-reefed foresail worked.
The Ghost clung on close to the wind and betrayed no inclination to fall off broadside to the trough.
I was famished, but Maud tried vainly to get me to eat.
I dozed with my mouth full of food.
I would fall asleep in the act of carrying food to my mouth and waken in torment to find the act yet uncompleted.
So sleepily helpless was I that she was compelled to hold me in my chair to prevent my being flung to the floor by the violent pitching of the schooner.
Of the passage from the galley to the cabin I knew nothing.
It was a sleep-walker Maud guided and supported.
In fact, I was aware of nothing till I awoke, how long after I could not imagine, in my bunk with my boots off.
It was dark.
I was stiff and lame, and cried out with pain when the bed-clothes touched my poor finger-ends.
Morning had evidently not come, so I closed my eyes and went to sleep again.
I did not know it, but I had slept the clock around and it was night again.
Once more I woke, troubled because I could sleep no better.
I struck a match and looked at my watch.
It marked midnight.
And I had not left the deck until three!
I should have been puzzled had I not guessed the solution.
No wonder I was sleeping brokenly.
I had slept twenty-one hours.
I listened for a while to the behaviour of the Ghost, to the pounding of the seas and the muffled roar of the wind on deck, and then turned over on my side and slept peacefully until morning.
When I arose at seven I saw no sign of Maud and concluded she was in the galley preparing breakfast.
On deck I found the Ghost doing splendidly under her patch of canvas.
But in the galley, though a fire was burning and water boiling, I found no Maud.
I discovered her in the steerage, by Wolf Larsen's bunk.
I looked at him, the man who had been hurled down from the topmost pitch of life to be buried alive and be worse than dead.
There seemed a relaxation of his expressionless face which was new.
Maud looked at me and I understood.
"His life flickered out in the storm," I said.
"But he still lives," she answered, infinite faith in her voice.
"He had too great strength."
"Yes," she said, "but now it no longer shackles him.
He is a free spirit."
"He is a free spirit surely," I answered; and, taking her hand, I led her on deck.
The storm broke that night, which is to say that it diminished as slowly as it had arisen.
After breakfast next morning, when I had hoisted Wolf Larsen's body on deck ready for burial, it was still blowing heavily and a large sea was running.
The deck was continually awash with the sea which came inboard over the rail and through the scuppers.
The wind smote the schooner with a sudden gust, and she heeled over till her lee rail was buried, the roar in her rigging rising in pitch to a shriek.
We stood in the water to our knees as I bared my head.
"I remember only one part of the service," I said, "and that is, 'And the body shall be cast into the sea.'"
Maud looked at me, surprised and shocked; but the spirit of something I had seen before was strong upon me, impelling me to give service to Wolf Larsen as Wolf Larsen had once given service to another man.
I lifted the end of the hatch cover and the canvas-shrouded body slipped feet first into the sea.
The weight of iron dragged it down.
It was gone.
"Good-bye, Lucifer, proud spirit," Maud whispered, so low that it was drowned by the shouting of the wind; but I saw the movement of her lips and knew.
As we clung to the lee rail and worked our way aft, I happened to glance to leeward.
The Ghost, at the moment, was uptossed on a sea, and I caught a clear view of a small steamship two or three miles away, rolling and pitching, head on to the sea, as it steamed toward us.
It was painted black, and from the talk of the hunters of their poaching exploits I recognized it as a United States revenue cutter.
I pointed it out to Maud and hurriedly led her aft to the safety of the poop.
I started to rush below to the flag-locker, then remembered that in rigging the Ghost.
I had forgotten to make provision for a flag-halyard.
"We need no distress signal," Maud said.
"They have only to see us."
"We are saved," I said, soberly and solemnly.
And then, in an exuberance of joy, "I hardly know whether to be glad or not."
I looked at her.
Our eyes were not loath to meet.
We leaned toward each other, and before I knew it my arms were about her.
"Need I?"
I asked.
And she answered, "There is no need, though the telling of it would be sweet, so sweet."
Her lips met the press of mine, and, by what strange trick of the imagination I know not, the scene in the cabin of the Ghost flashed upon me, when she had pressed her fingers lightly on my lips and said, "Hush, hush."
"My woman, my one small woman," I said, my free hand petting her shoulder in the way all lovers know though never learn in school.
"My man," she said, looking at me for an instant with tremulous lids which fluttered down and veiled her eyes as she snuggled her head against my breast with a happy little sigh.
I looked toward the cutter.
It was very close.
A boat was being lowered.
"One kiss, dear love," I whispered.
"One kiss more before they come."
"And rescue us from ourselves," she completed, with a most adorable smile, whimsical as I had never seen it, for it was whimsical with love.