Alice was tired of sitting by her sister on the riverbank.
She had nothing to do.
Once or twice she peeked into the book her sister was reading.
It wasn't very exciting.
It had no pictures or any dialogue in it.
What good is a book, thought Alice, without pictures or conversations?
She wondered if she should search for daisies to make a daisy chain.
She was about to begin her search when a white rabbit with pink eyes ran by her.
There wasn't anything particularly odd about a rabbit running close to her.
But this rabbit was different.
This rabbit spoke!
"Oh dear!
Oh dear!
I shall be late!"
it said.
But it wasn't until the rabbit took a watch out of its pocket that Alice ran across the field after it.
She caught up with it just in time to see it pop down a large rabbit hole under the hedge.
Within a minute, Alice went down after it.
She never once considered how in the world she'd get back out again.
The hole went straight on like a tunnel for quite a ways.
Then it dipped down so suddenly that Alice had no time to think about stopping herself.
She fell so fast!
It was as if she was going down a well.
She decided that either the well was very deep or she was falling slowly.
Alice had plenty of time to look around her.
At first, she tried to look down to see where she was going.
But it was too dark to see anything.
Then she looked to the sides of the well.
They were filled with cupboards and bookshelves.
There were maps lying about and pictures hung on pegs.
Alice grabbed one of the jars on the shelves as she passed.
It was labeled Orange Marmalade.
To her great disappointment, it was empty.
She didn't dare drop the jar and hurt anyone underneath.
So she managed to place it on a shelf as she continued her fall.
Well, thought Alice, after such a fall as this, I shall think nothing of tumbling down the stairs.
Even if I fell off the house it would not be such a fall as this.
Down, down, down.
Would the fall ever end?I wonder how many miles I've fallen, Alice thought.
I must be getting near the center of the earth.
Let me see, that would be about 4,000 miles down.
Then she had an eerie thought.
I wonder if I shall fall through the earth?
I'd have to ask if I were in New Zealand or Australia, I suppose.
Alice tried to curtsy as she fell, for she wanted to appear polite.
"They'd think I was a silly girl for asking!"
Alice said aloud.
She decided she'd never ask anyone which country she landed in.
She'd find out the answer herself.
She must!
Down, down, down.
There was nothing else to do.
So Alice soon began talking again.
"My poor cat!Dinah will miss me terribly tonight.
I do hope they'll remember her saucer of milk at teatime."
Alice sighed. 
"Oh, Dinah!
I do wish you were here with me.
There are no mice in the air though.
Perhaps you'd catch a bat.
Do cats eat bats I wonder?"
Alice started to get sleepy.
She continued to talk to herself. 
"Do cats eat bats?
Do bats eat cats?"
She had no answers.
She was dozing off when suddenly, thump!
Down she came upon a heap of leaves.
At last, the fall was over!
Alice wasn't hurt one bit.
She jumped to her feet.
It was very, very dark.
Before her, there was a long passage.
The White Rabbit was scurrying down it!
Alice chased it in a flash.
She could hear the White Rabbit speaking, "Oh, my ears and whiskers!How late it's getting.
It's terribly late.
Terribly late."
Then the White Rabbit rounded the corner and was gone.
Alice was left all alone in a long, low hall.
It was lit only by lamps hanging from the roof.
There were doors all around the hall.
Alice walked up and down and tried opening each one, but she had no luck.
They were all locked.
How would she ever get out again?
Suddenly, Alice came upon a three-legged table.
It was made of solid glass.
On top of the table lay a tiny golden key.
She noticed the locks on the doors were much bigger.
The key would never work.
Lucky for her, she then saw a curtain about fifteen inches high.
Behind it was a little door.
To her delight, the key fit into the lock!
Alice opened the door.
It led to a small passage no bigger than a rat hole.
She knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
How Alice longed to get out of that dark hall.
Wouldn't it be wonderful to wander among the beds of bright flowers?
The cool fountains would feel lovely.
How she wished she could reach it!
But it would be impossible.
She couldn't even fit her head through the doorway!
"Even if I could get my head through, what good would it be without my shoulders?"
Alice asked the door.
There seemed to be no use waiting by the little door.
So, she went back to the table.
She half hoped she might find another key on it.
This time, she found a little bottle on the table.
Alice knew it was certainly not there before.
Tied around the neck of the bottle was a paper label that said: DRINK ME.
The words were beautifully printed in large letters.
Alice was not going to rush into drinking anything without examining the label a little better.
"I'll look first to see if it says poison on the bottle."She had read far too many stories where children were eaten by beasts or had other bad things happen to them.
Why?
All because they didn't remember the rules of safety they'd been taught.
After examining the label and seeing no such word, Alice drank it.
"What an odd feeling," said Alice.
"I must be shutting up like a telescope."
She was indeed!
Alice was now only ten inches high!
She ran toward the garden at once.
But when she got to the door, she realized she had forgotten the key.
When she went back to get it, she couldn't reach it.
She was too small now.
When she looked up, she could see it through the glass.
She tried her best to climb up one of the legs.
No luck!
She was too small and it was too slippery.
Alice sat down and cried.
Soon her eyes fell on a little glass box under the table.
She hadn't noticed it before.
She opened it to find a very small cake.
The words EAT ME were beautifully written with berries.
"Well, I'll eat it.
If it makes me grow taller, I'll reach the key.
If it makes me grow smaller, then I'll creep under the door.
Either way, I'll get into the garden.
I don't care which happens."
Alice nibbled on the cake and anxiously said,"Which way?
Which way?"
 She held her hand to her head to see which way it was growing.
There was no change.
She remained the same size.
Disappointed, she decided to finish the entire cake.
"Curiouser and curiouser!" cried Alice. 
"Now I'm opening out like the largest telescope that ever was.
Good-bye feet!"
When she looked down, her feet looked so far off.
It was impossible for her to reach them!
"Oh, my poor feet.
I wonder who will put on your stockings and shoes now.
I won't be able to anymore.
But I must be kind to them," said Alice, "or they won't walk the way I want them to go.
That would be dreadful."
She decided that she would give them a new pair of boots every Christmas.
As Alice thought about her far-off feet, her head struck against the roof of the hall.
She was now over nine feet tall!
She grabbed the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.
Poor Alice!
She had to lie down on her side to look through the keyhole into the garden.
But to get through now was even more hopeless than ever.
She sat up and began to cry.
"You ought to be ashamed of yourself," Alice huffed. 
"Stop crying this moment," she ordered herself.
But she couldn't stop the tears.
She shed gallons and gallons of tears until a large pool surrounded her.
The pool was four inches deep and reached halfway down the hall.
After a time, she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance.
She quickly dried her eyes so she could see what was coming.
The White Rabbit suddenly reappeared, splendidly dressed.
He had a pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a fan in the other.
He came trotting along in a hurried pace.
"Oh, the Duchess!"
he muttered.
"I've kept her waiting!
She'll be mad at me!
Oh dear!"
Alice had no choice but to ask for help. "
Sir, if you please …"
But Alice's voice scared off the White Rabbit.
He dropped his belongings and scurried into the darkness.
Alice snatched up the fan and, since it was so very hot, fanned herself. 
"Dear, dear.
How queer everything is today.
Everything was fine yesterday.
But now? I wonder if I changed in the night?"
She tapped her chin. 
"Let me see.
Am I the same as I was this morning?
If I'm not the same person, then who am I?"
Alice began thinking of all the children she knew her own age.
Maybe she was changed into one of them.
She pursed her lips.
"I'm sure I'm not Ada.
Her hair has long ringlets.
I have none at all.
And Mabel?
I can't be Mabel, for she knows so little and I know all sorts of things."
To test herself, she thought of all the things she knew. "
Let me see: four times five is twelve and four times six is thirteen."
Then she thought about the problems once more.
"Oh no, I think I've forgotten my math!
This is all so puzzling to me.
Maybe I should try geography: London is the capital of Paris.
Paris is the capital of Rome.
Rome is the capital of …
no that's all wrong.
Now I am certain I must have been changed into Mabel!
For I don't know anything anymore."
Alice started to cry.
"If I am Mabel, I might as well stay here, for I know nothing of value up there."The truth was, Alice didn't dare want to stay where she was.
She cried more.
"I am so lonely here by myself."
She was surprised when she looked down at her hands.
She was wearing one of the small white kid gloves!
"How did I manage that?"
she whispered.
"They are so small.
I must be growing smaller."
 She got up and measured herself next to the table.
She was about two feet tall and continuing to shrink.
As soon as she realized that the fan was making her shrink, she dropped it to the ground.
She dropped it just in time!
For surely she would have disappeared altogether very soon.
She was certain of it.
"What a narrow escape," said Alice.
She was quite frightened but relieved to still exist. "
And now for the garden.
"
She ran all the way to the little door, but it was closed again.
The little golden key was still lying on the glass table.
"Just like before, but things are now worse than ever!
I am way too small to reach it!"
She leaned forward trying to reach it.
Of course she had no luck.
At that moment, she slipped.
She was soon up to her chin in salt water.
Her first thought was that she ended up in the sea.
She looked around to see if she recognized the seaside.
Before long, she realized she was not at the beach.
Rather, she was in a pool of tears - - tears she had wept when she was nine feet high!
"I wish I hadn't cried so much!"
cried Alice as she swam about trying to find a way out.
"How awful everything is today!
Simply dreadful!"
Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool.
She swam closer to get a better look.
It was a mouse who had slipped in just like herself!
"Oh, Mouse!
Do you know the way out of this pool?
I am so tired of swimming around."
The Mouse just stared at Alice.
Perhaps he doesn't understand English, thought Alice.
I bet it's a French mouse.
So she began again, "Ou est ma chatte?"
This was the first lesson in her French book.
The Mouse leaped away and quivered with fright. 
"Oh, I beg your pardon," Alice said.
"I forgot you mustn't like cats.
Please forgive me.
I meant no harm."
"Not like cats!"
shrieked the Mouse.
"Would you like cats if you were me?"
"Perhaps not," said Alice in a soothing voice.
"But don't be angry.
I do wish I could show you my cat, Dinah.
I think you'd take a fancy to cats if only you could see her.
She's such a dear, quiet thing."
 She looked at the Mouse.
It was shaking all over. 
"Oh, I am sorry.
I won't talk about her anymore if it offends you."
The Mouse trembled from the tip of its nose to the end of its tail.
"Our family has always hated cats.
They are nasty and vulgar.
Please don't mention that nasty word again!"
"I won't," said Alice, in a great hurry to change the subject."Are you fond of dogs?"
The Mouse didn't answer, so Alice continued talking.
"There is such a nice dog by our house.
I'd like to show you.
It fetches and begs for dinner.
It does all sorts of wonderful things.
The farmer says it kills rats and all sorts of …"
But she didn't finish.
"Oh dear," said Alice as she saw the Mouse swimming away and making quite a commotion in the pool.
"Mouse, do come back.
We won't talk about cats or dogs.
I promise."
The Mouse turned back and swam up to Alice with a pale face. 
"Let's get to the shore and I'll tell you my story.
You'll soon know why I hate cats and dogs."
The pool was quite crowded now with all the animals that had fallen in.
There was a Duck, a Dodo, a Lory, an Eaglet, and other curious creatures.
Alice led the way back to the shore.
They were indeed an odd-looking bunch that assembled on the bank.
The birds' feathers were soaked.
The animals' fur clung to their bodies.
All the creatures were dripping wet and uncomfortable - - especially Alice.
The first question, of course, was how to get dry again.
All of the animals spoke at once.
Alice was getting quite used to these talking animals.
Within minutes, she felt like she had known them all her life.
She did, however, have an argument with the Lory.
He turned sulky and would only say, "I'm older than you so I must know better and be wiser than you."
Alice wasn't so sure about his age.
What if he wasn't older?
"Just how old are you?"
she asked.
But he refused to answer, which made Alice angry.
At last, the Mouse took charge. 
"Sit down, all of you, and listen to me.
I'll soon make you dry enough."
 They all sat at once in a large circle with the Mouse in the middle.
Alice refused to take her eyes off of the Mouse, for she feared she'd catch a bad cold if she didn't get dry soon.
She wondered how, exactly, he would manage to dry them all.
"Are you ready?" asked the Mouse. 
"This is the driest thing I know."
He started to tell them a story about William the Conqueror.
"Ugh!" said the Lory as he shivered.
"I beg your pardon!" said the Mouse, frowning."Did you speak?"
"Not I," said the Lory.
The Mouse continued on and looked at Alice."How are you getting along?"
"I'm still as wet as ever," Alice replied.
"Your story isn't drying me at all."
The Dodo stood.
"In that case, I move to have this meeting adjourned."
"Speak English," said the Eaglet.
"I don't know some of those big words."
"What I was going to say," the Dodo continued,"was that the best thing to have us dry off would be a Caucus-race."
"What's that?" asked Alice.
It wasn't that she really wanted to know, but she thought someone should ask.
"The best way to explain it is to do it," said the Dodo.
He asked everyone to line up in sort of a circle.
There was no shouting of, "One, two, three, go."
Rather everyone just ran this way and that way when they felt like it.
No one knew when the race should end or which direction to take off in next.
After a half hour, when all seemed dry, the Dodo suddenly called out, "The race is over."
The animals crowded around the Dodo. 
"Who won?"
The Dodo had no idea who won the race.
He stood for a long time with one finger pressed upon his forehead while everyone waited in silence.
At last, the Dodo said, "Everyone has won and everyone will get prizes."
Everyone cheered.
"But who's to give the prizes?"
 they asked.
"Why, she is, of course," said the Dodo, pointing to Alice.
At once, they surged toward Alice chanting,"Prizes!
Prizes!
Prizes!"
Alice had no idea what to do.
She put her hand in her pocket and pulled out a box of candy.
Luckily, the salt water hadn't harmed it.
She awarded each animal a prize.
There was exactly enough for everyone to get one piece of candy.
Except her.
The Mouse spoke up, "She must have a prize herself."
"Of course," the Dodo replied gravely.
"What else do you have in your pocket?"
"Only a thimble," said Alice, feeling a bit sad.
"Hand it to me," said the Dodo.
Once Alice did so, the Dodo handed it right back to her.
"We beg your acceptance of this elegant thimble."
Everyone cheered once more.
Alice thought the whole thing was absurd, but she didn't dare laugh.
She couldn't think of anything to say, so she bowed and took the thimble.
Everyone started to eat the candy.
This caused confusion once more.
The small birds choked on theirs and had to be patted on the back.
The large birds complained they couldn't taste anything.
Finally, they sat back down in a circle and asked the Mouse to tell them another story.
Alice spoke up, "You promised to tell me why you hate …"
She paused and then whispered, "C and D."
"Mine is a long and sad tale," said the Mouse.
He turned to Alice and let out a long sigh.
Alice looked at the Mouse's tail.
"It certainly is indeed a long tail, but why do you call it sad?"
"Listen to my tale and you'll know," said the Mouse.
As the Mouse told his tale, she imagined it like this:
"Fury said to a mouse,
That he met in the house,
'Let us both go to law:
I will prosecute you.
Come, I'll take no denial.
We must
have the trial;
For really
this morning
I've nothing
to do.'
Said
the mouse
to the cur,
'Such a trial,
dear sir.
With
no jury or
judge, would
be wasting
our breath.'
'I'll be jury,'
said cunning
old Fury:
'I'll try the
whole
cause
and
con
demn
you
to
death.'"
As Alice listened to the Mouse's story, she studied his tail.
It didn't look sad to her.
Maybe I'm not looking hard enough, she thought.
She studied his tail a bit more.
It was obvious to the Mouse that she wasn't listening to a word he said.
He got up to leave.
"Please come back and finish your story," said the animals.
But the Mouse's pace only quickened.
"What a pity he wouldn't stay," said the Lory when the Mouse was too far off to overhear.
Then a Crab spoke to her daughter. 
"Let this be a lesson to you.
Never lose your temper."
"Oh, how I wish I had my Dinah here," said Alice to no one in particular.
"She'd fetch that Mouse and bring it right back to us."
"And who, may I ask," said the Lory, "is Dinah?"
Alice replied eagerly, for she always loved talking about her pet. 
"Dinah is my pet.
She's a cat and great at catching mice.
And oh!
I wish you could see her with the birds.
As soon as she sees one, she's off trying to catch it.
She loves to eat birds you know."
Alice's comments caused quite a stir among everyone.
Some of the birds hurried off at once.
A Canary called to its children, "Come away, dears.
It's way past your bedtime."
Soon, Alice was left all alone."Oh, how I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah.
Nobody seems to like her down here.
But I am sure she is the best cat in the world."
Then Alice trembled.
"What if I never see my Dinah again?"
Alice started to cry once more.
She felt lonely and her spirit was broken.
In a little while, however, she once again heard the pattering of footsteps in the distance.
She looked up eagerly, hoping that the Mouse had changed its mind and was coming back to finish its story.
It was the White Rabbit trotting back again.
He muttered, "The Duchess!
Oh, my dear paws.
Oh, my fur and whiskers.
She'll be furious with me.
Where could I have dropped them?"
Alice quickly guessed that he was looking for the fan and the kid gloves.
She started to hunt for them.
They were nowhere to be seen.
Everything seemed to have changed since her swim.
The great hall with the glass table and the little door had vanished completely.
The White Rabbit finally noticed Alice.
"Why, Mary Ann, are you here?
Run home this moment and fetch me some gloves and a fan."
Alice was so frightened at his angry voice that she ran off in the direction he pointed.
She didn't even bother trying to explain his mistake.
He thought I was his maid!
How surprised he'll be to discover who I really am!
she thought.
But then Alice decided that he may truly need those items, so she quickly walked on until she came upon a house.
A bright brass plate was on the door.
W. Rabbit was engraved upon it.
Alice entered without knocking and hurried upstairs.
She feared she'd meet the real Mary Ann if she lingered too long.
"How odd it is that I am running an errand for a rabbit.
I suppose Dinah will be sending me on errands next."
Alice soon found herself in a tiny room with a table by the window.
Upon it lay three pairs of tiny gloves and a fan.
She grabbed them and was about to leave when she noticed a bottle on the table near the looking glass.
There was no label with the words Drink Me, but she uncorked it and sipped it anyway.
"Whenever I eat or drink anything, something interesting always happens.
I do hope this will make me grow larger," Alice muttered.
For Alice was rather tired of being such a tiny thing.
It did indeed make her grow!
Before she drank half the bottle, she found her head pressed against the ceiling!
She quickly put the bottle down. 
That's quite enough!
I wish I hadn't sipped so much.
Now I can't get out the door."
Within seconds, she had doubled in size and had to kneel on the floor to fit in the room.
She continued to grow.
Next, she had to lay down with one elbow curled around her head and the other against the door.
Still she went on growing.
As a last effort, she put one arm out the window and one foot up the chimney. "
Now I can do no more.
What will become of me?"
Lucky for Alice, she didn't grow anymore.
"Oh, I wish I had never gone down the rabbit hole," Alice moaned.
"It was much nicer at home.
Here, I just keep growing and shrinking.
I am so uncomfortable.
When I used to read fairy tales, I didn't believe these things truly happened.
And now I'm in the middle of one such tale.
There ought to be a book written about me."
She tried to wiggle her toes and fingers but couldn't move them an inch. 
"When I grow up, I'll write one," Alice declared.
Then she realized that she was all grown up.
She felt sad again and cried even harder than before.
Then she wondered, "Will I ever get older than I am now?
It would be nice if I never had to grow old.
But then I'd always have lessons to learn.
I wouldn't like that!"
Suddenly she heard a voice coming closer. 
"Mary Ann!
Fetch me my gloves this minute."
Then came the White Rabbit's pattering feet.
She trembled realizing that the White Rabbit was searching for her.
She soon forgot that she was now a thousand times larger than him.
She needn't have been frightened of him.
The White Rabbit came to the door and tried to open it.
Alice was bunched up against it.
The door wouldn't budge.
"Fine," she heard him say.
"I'll go to the window and come in through it."
When she heard the White Rabbit below the window, she spread her fingers out and tried to grab him.
She heard a crash of some sort.
She assumed the Rabbit had fallen onto the greenhouse below.
Then Alice heard another voice say, "I'm just digging for apples."
Now the Rabbit sounded angry. 
"Pat, tell me.
What's that up there in the window?"
"It's an arm," said the second voice.
It obviously was someone named Pat.
The Rabbit shrieked. 
"An arm?
It has no business here.
Go take it away at once."
Alice suddenly heard more voices and words like ladder, rope, and chimney.
Someone shouted, "Bill's going down the chimney."
"Oh!" said Alice. "
So Bill's planning on coming down the chimney?
I think not."
 Not that she knew who Bill was.
She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could.
Alice waited until she heard a little animal scratching and scrambling about in the chimney.
That's when she knew Bill was there.
She gave one sharp kick and waited to see what happened next.
The first thing she heard was shouting.
"There goes Bill!" they shouted.
Then the White Rabbit said, "Are you okay?
You shot out of that chimney like a rocket!"
There was dead silence.
I wonder what they'll do next?
If they had any sense, they'd take the roof off.
Soon, Alice heard the Rabbit say, "A barrowful is what we need to start with."
A barrowful of what?
thought Alice.
She didn't have long to wonder.
Within a minute, a shower of little pebbles came rattling at the window.
Some hit her face.
She thought, I'll put a stop to this.
"You better not do that again!"
Alice yelled.
That produced dead silence.
Alice noticed with some surprise that all the pebbles turned into little cakes as they lay on the floor.
She had a splendid idea.
If I eat one, she thought, it's sure to make some changes in my size.
And as it can'tpossibly make me larger, it must make me smaller.
So she swallowed one of the cakes and started to shrink.
As soon as she was small enough, she ran out of the house and found a quiet crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside.
The poor Lizard, Bill, was in the middle being held up by two guinea pigs who were giving him something out of a bottle.
They all rushed at Alice the moment she appeared, but she ran off as fast as she could.
She soon found herself safe in the woods.
The first thing I must do is grow to my right size again.
The second thing is to find myself a way into that lovely garden.
I think that's the best plan, she thought.
Alice soon saw an enormous puppy.
She would have loved to play with the puppy, but she feared it would trample her as they played fetch.
Then she wondered if the dog was hungry.
"That surely would not be a good thing," Alice muttered.
"He could eat me up."She decided she must get away from the dog.
As she threw the stick one way, she ran the other.
"How sad," said Alice.
"I would have liked to teach that puppy tricks.
If only I had been the right size to do it.
But how do I go about making myself the right size again?"
Alice looked all around her.
Nothing looked like it would be the right thing to eat or drink.
There was a large mushroom in front of her.
It was about the same height as herself.
Alice looked under the mushroom and on both sides of it.
Then it occurred to her that she should look on top of it.
She stretched herself up on her tiptoes and peered on top of the mushroom.
Her eyes immediately met those of a large, blue caterpillar.
He was sitting quietly on top with his arms folded.
He took no notice of her or anything else.
The Caterpillar and Alice stared at each other in silence.
At last, the Caterpillar said, "Who are you?"
"I hardly know," said Alice shyly.
"I knew who I was when I got up this morning.
But I've changed several times since then."
"Explain yourself," said the Caterpillar.
"I can't explain myself because I'm not myself, you see," said Alice.
"Being so many sizes in one day is confusing.
Quite confusing indeed."
"No, it isn't," said the Caterpillar.
"Oh, but it is.
You'll discover it soon enough,"said Alice. 
"When you have to turn into a chrysalis and then into a butterfly, you'll feel a bit odd I suspect."
"Not a bit," said the Caterpillar.
"Well," said Alice, "it would feel odd to me."
"But who are you?" asked the Caterpillar.
This, of course, brought them right back to the beginning of their conversation.
Alice felt a bit frustrated with his questions and short remarks.
"Who are you?"
she demanded.
"You ought to tell me who you are first."
"Why?" asked the Caterpillar.
Here was another one of his puzzling questions.
Alice couldn't think of any good answer.
Since the Caterpillar was in a very unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.
She felt she was subjected to enough rudeness for one day.
"Come back," he yelled after her.
"I have something important to say."
This sounded promising to Alice.
She turned back toward him.
"Do keep your temper," said the Caterpillar.
"Is that all?"
asked Alice as she swallowed her anger as best as she could.
"No," said the Caterpillar.
But he didn't speak again for several minutes.
He looked her up and down.
Finally, he said, "So you think you're changed, do you?"
"I'm afraid I am," said Alice.
"I can't remember things like I used to and I keep growing or shrinking.
I can't seem to keep the same size for more than ten minutes."
"What can't you remember?" he asked. 
"Can you recite 'You Are Old, Father William'?"
Alice folded her hands and began to recite the poem.
When she finished, she looked to him for approval.
He sighed and announced, "That was wrong from beginning to end.
What size do you want to be?"
"I'm not particular," said Alice.
"One that doesn't like changing so much, you know."
"I don't know," said the Caterpillar.
Alice felt she might lose her temper any second.
"Are you happy with your size now?" asked the Caterpillar.
"I wouldn't mind being a bit larger," said Alice.
"Three inches isn't the best height to be.
In fact, it's a terrible height for a child to be."
This made the Caterpillar angry.
"It is a good height indeed."
He was exactly three inches high.
"But I'm not used to it," pleaded Alice.
"You creatures are offended so easily."
"You'll get used to it in time," the Caterpillar said.
Alice waited for him to speak again.
Before he did, he yawned and shook his body.
Then he got down off the mushroom and crawled away.
He remarked, "One side will make you grow taller and the other will make you grow shorter."
One side of what?
Alice thought.
"Of the mushroom," said the Caterpillar just as if Alice had asked the question aloud.
In another moment, the Caterpillar was out of sight.
Alice remained and stared at the mushroom for a minute.
She tried to decide which side was which, as it was perfectly round.
At last, she stretched her arms around the mushroom as far as they would go.
Then, Alice broke off a bit with each hand.
"Which is which?"
She had some in her right hand from the right side of the mushroom.
And she had some in her left hand from the left side of the mushroom.
She nibbled a small piece from the right hand to see the effect.
The next thing she knew, she was shrinking!
She was frightened by the change and started to nibble on the mushroom from her left hand.
Now she grew so large that her neck rose like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves.
They were trees!She was as tall as the trees in the woods!
She tried getting her hands up to her neck, which seemed to be tangled a bit.
It was no use.
Then she tried getting her head down to her hands.
She was delighted to find that her neck could bend in all directions like a snake.
Since Alice's neck got tangled in the branches, she had to untwist it every so often.
Still, she was thrilled to have this new neck.
Alice enjoyed the peaceful view until she heard a loud hiss.
A large Pigeon had flown into her face and beat her with its wings.
"Serpent!" screamed the Pigeon.
"I am not a serpent," said Alice.
"Leave me alone."
The Pigeon screamed again. 
"Serpent!"
Then the Pigeon quieted a bit.
"I have tried every which way.
But nothing seems to work."
"I have no idea what you're talking about," said Alice.
"I've tried the roots of trees," said the Pigeon."Hedges.
Even banks.
There's just no pleasing those serpents."
Alice was more puzzled than ever but decided to allow the Pigeon to continue with her ranting.
"Hatching the eggs is trouble enough.
But I must be on the lookout for serpents night and day," said the Pigeon.
"I haven't had a wink of sleep in three weeks."
Alice was beginning to understand.
"I'm very sorry.
Truly, I am."
"Just as I thought I found the perfect spot!
Even in the highest tree in the wood they come slithering about."
"But I'm not a serpent," Alice said again.
"I'm a little girl."
"Little girls do not have necks like yours," said the Pigeon.
"I suppose you'll tell me next that you've never eaten an egg."
"I have eaten eggs," said Alice.
"
But little girls eat lots of eggs all the time."
"I don't believe you," said the Pigeon.
"If little girls eat eggs, then they are some type of serpent, too."
Alice thought about this for a minute.
When she didn't speak again, the Pigeon added, "You're looking for eggs so it doesn't matter to me if you're a little girl or a serpent."
"It matters to me," said Alice.
"I'm not looking for eggs.
If I were, I wouldn't want yours anyway.
I don't like my eggs raw."
"Be off then," said the Pigeon in a sulky voice.
It took several minutes before Alice realized that she still had bits of mushroom in her hands.
She slowly nibbled crumbs from her right hand and then crumbs from her left.
She'd grow too much and then shrink too much.
But eventually, she ate just enough of both that she was once again her normal size.
Alice was happy to be her normal height, even if it felt a bit odd.
She started walking and came upon a house just four feet tall.
"I don't want to scare whoever lives there," Alice said.
"If they see me, I'll scare the wits out of them.
I don't want anyone to be frightened."
So Alice nibbled once again from her right hand and brought herself down to just nine inches high.
For a minute or two, Alice stood staring at the house.
While wondering what she should do next, a Fish-Footman came out of the woods.
It rapped its knuckles on the door to the house.
A Frog-Footman answered the door.
Alice thought it was quite a curious sight.
She crept a bit out of the woods to get a closer look.
The fish handed over an envelope. 
"This is an invitation for the Duchess.
The Queen would like to invite her to play croquet."
With that, both bowed to each other.
After the Fish-Footman had gone, Alice walked shyly up to the door and knocked.
"There's no use in knocking," said the Frog-Footman.
"I'm on the same side of the door as you are.
Those inside can't hear you.
They're making too much noise."
Alice listened at the door.
He was right.
There was an awful ruckus going on.
She heard a great many sneezes, howling, and crashes of all sorts.
"How do I get in?"
Alice asked.
At that moment, the door opened a crack.
A large plate came whizzing out.
It grazed the frog's nose and smashed into pieces against a tree behind them.
The Frog-Footman babbled on without even flinching.
It was like nothing had happened.
He's making no sense at all, thought Alice.
So she pushed on the door and easily found herself in the smoky kitchen.
On one side, the Duchess sat on a three-legged stool nursing a baby.
On the opposite side, the cook stirred a large pot.
The cook furiously added pepper to the soup.
There was so much pepper, Alice started to sneeze.
Then the Duchess sneezed, and the baby sneezed.
How odd, thought Alice, that the cook and her cat are not sneezing.
Alice couldn't take her eyes off the cat.
It was a large cat sitting on the hearth and grinning from ear to ear.
"Why does your cat grin like that?" asked Alice."Please tell me.
It's a most curious thing."
"It's a Cheshire Cat.
That's why," said the cook as she added more pepper to the pot.
"Most of them grin."
Alice looked confused.
"I didn't know that cats grinned at all."
"You don't know much," said the Duchess.
"That's a fact."
Alice didn't care for her tone of voice one little bit.
She planned to tell the Duchess so.
But before she said anything, she had to duck fast.
For the cook threw everything within her reach at Alice, the baby, and the Duchess.
The Duchess didn't seem to notice!
Even when a plate hit her, she didn't flinch.
"Do be careful!" screamed Alice.
"A plate almost hit the baby!"
"If everyone just minded their own business,"said the Duchess, "the world would go around a great deal faster than it does."
"Which would not be such a good thing," said Alice.
She felt quite happy that she could show off how smart she truly was. "
Just think what work it would make with the day and night.
You see, Earth takes twenty-four hours to turn on its axis."
"Speaking of axes," said the Duchess, "chop off her head!"
Alice glared at the cook to see what she would do.
Thankfully, the cook was too busy throwing things and stirring the soup to pay any attention to the Duchess.
"Is it twenty-four hours or twelve hours?"
Alice asked.
"Don't bother me," said the Duchess as she flung the baby to Alice.
"Take the baby.
I must get ready to play croquet with the Queen."
She hurried out the door and just missed being hit by the flying frying pan.
Alice barely caught the baby!
She quickly brought the baby outside.
What relief Alice felt when she saw that it wasn't a baby she was holding.
It was only a pig!
She gently set the pig down on the ground and watched it race off.
When she looked up, she saw the Cheshire Cat sitting on a branch in a tree.
The Cat grinned.
Although it looked happy, Alice couldn't help but notice its long, sharp claws and teeth.
She knew she had to treat it with great respect.
She was too afraid not to.
"Cheshire Cat, would you please tell me which way to go?"
"That depends where you want to get to," replied the Cat.
"I don't much care," said Alice.
"Then it doesn't matter which way you go," replied the Cat.
"I just need to get somewhere," Alice offered. 
"Anywhere."
"If you walk long enough," said the Cat, "then you will get somewhere."
Alice felt frustrated. 
"True.
Well," she said glancing around, "what kind of people live around here?"
"In that direction," the Cat said waving a paw around, "lives a Hatter."
 Waving the other paw, he added, "In that direction, lives a March Hare.
Visit either you want.
Both are mad - - as mad as can be."
"I don't want to be where mad people are," said Alice.
"You can't help it," said the Cat.
"We're all crazy here.
I'm mad.
You're mad."
He paused.
"Are you playing croquet with the Queen today?"
"I would like to but haven't been invited yet,"said Alice.
"You'll see me there," said the Cat.
Then he vanished.
Alice was getting used to strange things such as disappearing cats.
The Cat reappeared.
"May I ask what became of the baby?"
"It was a pig," said Alice.
"I let it go."
"I thought so," said the Cat.
It vanished again.
Alice waited a bit expecting it to reappear.
After a few minutes, she walked toward the March Hare.
"I've seen Hatters before."
As she said this, she noticed the Cat back on the branch of a tree.
"Did you say it was a pig?
Or was it a fig?"
"I said pig," said Alice.
"I wish you wouldn't keep appearing and vanishing so suddenly."
"All right," said the Cat.
This time, he vanished slowly beginning with his tail and ending with his grin.
His grin remained for some time after the rest of it had gone.
Alice thought it was the most curious thing she had ever seen.
Not much farther ahead, Alice came upon the house of the March Hare.
It was such a large house that she didn't dare go closer until she nibbled some of the mushroom in her left hand.
It caused her to grow about two feet high.
She walked slowly up to the house.
"What if the Hare is raving mad?"
Then she had a terrible thought,
Perhaps I should have gone to see the Hatter instead.
There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house.
The March Hare and the Hatter were sitting drinking tea.
A Dormouse was sitting between them.
He was fast asleep.
The March Hare and the Hatter were using his head as a cushion.
They rested their elbows on the Dormouse's ears and talked over his head.
The table was large but the three were all crowded together at one corner.
"No room!
No room!"
 they cried when they saw Alice coming.
"There's plenty of room!" said Alice indignantly.
She sat down in a large armchair at one end of the table.
"It wasn't very civil of you to sit at our table without being invited," said the March Hare.
What rudeness, thought Alice.
"It wasn't very civil of you not to invite me," said Alice.
"
And I didn't know it was your table.
There is certainly room for more than three people."
"Your hair needs cutting," said the Hatter.
He had been staring at her hair for several minutes.
"You should learn not to make such personal remarks about people.
It's quite rude," said Alice.
The Hatter's eyes grew wide.
"Why is a raven like a writing desk?"
Alice smiled. 
"Riddles?
I love riddles.
I believe I can answer that."
Alice tried to think of everything she knew about ravens and writing desks.
Her thoughts were interrupted.
"What day of the month is it?" asked the Hatter, turning to Alice.
He had taken his watch out of his pocket and looked at it uneasily.
He shook it every now and then and held it to his ear.
Alice thought about it for a minute. 
"The fourth."
"Two days wrong," sighed the Hatter.
He turned to the March Hare.
"I told you butter wouldn't work."
He looked angrily at the March Hare.
"It was the best butter," the March Hare meekly replied.
"Crumbs must have gotten in as well," sighed the Hatter.
He shook his head in disgust.
"You shouldn't have put it in with the bread knife."
The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily.
Then he dipped it into his cup of tea and looked at it again.
"It was the best butter, you know.
It truly was the best, best butter."
Alice couldn't help but notice the watch.
"What a funny watch.
It tells the day of the month but not what o'clock it is.
How odd."
"Why should it?" muttered the Hatter. 
"Does your watch tell you the year?"
"Of course not," Alice replied. 
"But that's because it's the same year for a long time.
It's easy to remember."
"Do you know the answer to the riddle yet?"asked the Hatter.
"No. I give up," said Alice.
"What's the answer?"
"I have no idea," said the Hatter.
"Nor do I," said the March Hare.
Alice sighed.
"I'd think you'd do something better with the time than waste it asking riddles that have no answers."
"If you knew Time as well as I do," said the Hatter,"you wouldn't talk about wasting it.
It's him."
"I don't know what you mean," said Alice.
"Of course you don't," said the Hatter.
"I dare say you've never even spoken to Time."
"Perhaps not," said Alice cautiously. 
"But I know I have to beat time when I learn music."
"Ah! That makes sense.
He won't stand for a beating, you know.
If only you had kept on good terms with him.
He'd do almost anything you liked with the clock.
You could keep the time you wanted always."
"Is that what you do?" asked Alice.
"It's always six o'clock.
It's tea time for us here,"explained the Hatter. "
And we've no time to wash the dishes and saucers between tea times."
"Then you keep moving round, I suppose?"
 said Alice.
"Exactly so," said the Hatter.
"But what happens when you come to the beginning again?" Alice asked.
"Suppose we change the subject," the March Hare interrupted, yawning. "I vote the young lady tells us a story."
"I'm afraid I don't know one," said Alice, rather alarmed at the proposal.
"Then the Dormouse shall!"
they both cried."Wake up the Dormouse!"
And they pinched him on both sides at once.
The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes.
"I wasn't asleep," he said in a hoarse, feeble voice.
"I heard every word you fellows were saying."
"Tell us a story," said the March Hare.
"Yes, please do!" pleaded Alice.
"And be quick about it," added the Hatter, "or you'll be asleep again before it's done."
"Once upon a time there were three little sisters," the Dormouse began in a great hurry. 
"And their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie.
They lived at the bottom of a well."
"What did they live on?" asked Alice.
She always took a great interest in questions of eating and drinking.
"They lived on molasses," said the Dormouse, after thinking a minute or two.
"They couldn't have done that, you know, "Alice gently remarked.
"They'd have been ill."
The Dormouse thought it over."So, yes.
They were ill - - very, very ill."
Alice helped herself to some tea and bread and butter.
Then she turned to the Dormouse and asked another question, "Why did they live at the bottom of the well?
Please tell me."
The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it.
Finally, he said, "It was a molasses well."
Then he nodded. 
"Yes, yes.
A molasses well."
"There's no such thing," said Alice.
She was beginning to get angry.
Before she could protest anymore, the Hatter and the March Hare went "Sh!Sh!"
"If you can't be civil," said the Dormouse, "then finish the story yourself."
"I'm sorry," said Alice.
"Do go on.
I won't interrupt you again."
The Dormouse continued with his story. 
"So these sisters were learning to draw."
"What did they draw?" asked Alice.
She had already forgotten her promise.
"Why, molasses, of course," said the Dormouse.
"I want a clean cup," interrupted the Hatter."Let's all move one place over."
He moved on as he spoke.
The Dormouse followed him.
Then the March Hare moved into the Dormouse's place.
And Alice rather unwillingly took the place of the March Hare.
This was too bad for Alice, as the March Hare had just spilled the milk jug on his plate.
"I don't understand," said Alice.
"Where did they draw the molasses out of?"
The Hatter interrupted.
"You can draw water out of a water well, can't you?
So I should think you could draw molasses out of a molasses well."
"They were learning to draw," the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing his eyes.
He was getting very sleepy. 
"And they drew all sorts of things.
They started with everything that begins with the letter M."
 He yawned again and couldn't finish his sentence.
"Why the letter M?" asked Alice.
"Why not?" said the March Hare.
Alice shrugged and didn't know what to say.
The Dormouse had closed his eyes by this time.
He started to doze off.
When the Hatter saw this, he pinched the Dormouse.
Of course the Dormouse awoke with a little shriek, and went on.
"They drew anything that started with an M. You know, things such as mousetraps and the moon.
How could I forget muchness?
You know you say things are 'much of a muchness.'
Did you ever see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness?"
"Really, now that you ask me," said Alice, confused, "I don't think - - "
"Then you shouldn't talk," said the Hatter.
"It's quite simple."
This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear.
She got up in disgust and walked off.
The Dormouse fell asleep instantly.
None of the others noticed or seemed to care that she was leaving.
Alice half hoped that they would notice and call after her to return.
The last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot.
"That was the oddest tea party ever," she said as she walked through the woods.
"I won't be going back there."
Just as she said this, she noticed one of the trees had a door leading right into it. 
"How curious!
But everything is curious today, isn't it?
I must go in at once."
And in she went!
Once more she found herself in a long hall and close to the little glass table.
"I'll manage better this time."
She took the key and unlocked the door that led into the garden.
Then she nibbled on a mushroom until she was a foot high.
Ah!
The perfect size!
Alice walked down a passage and found herself at last in the beautiful garden.
In no time, she was standing among the bright flowerbeds and cool fountains.
A large rosebush stood near the entrance of the garden.
The roses on it were white.
Three gardeners were busy painting each one of them red.
Alice thought this was a curious thing and moved in closer to watch them.
"Look out, Five.
Don't go splashing paint all over me like that."
"I couldn't help it," said Five, sulking.
"Seven bumped my elbow."
Seven looked up.
"That's right, Five.
Always blame someone else."
"You'd better not talk," said Five.
"Why just yesterday I heard the Queen say you deserved to be beheaded."
"What for?" asked the first gardener.
"That's none of your business, Two," said Seven.
"Yes, it is his business," said Five.
"I'll tell him.
It was for bringing the cook tulip roots instead of onions."
Seven flung down his brush and began, "Of all the unjust things."
 That's when he caught sight of Alice.
He looked her over carefully and then bowed.
Alice moved a bit closer. 
"Would you please tell me why you are painting those roses red?"
Five and Seven said nothing but looked at Two.
Two spoke at once, "The fact is that this should have been a red rose tree.
We put in a white one by mistake.
If the Queen finds out, she'll have our heads cut off.
We're doing our best to fix it before the Queen sees it."
Five, who had been looking anxiously across the garden, started to shout, "The Queen!
The Queen is coming!"
With those words, the three gardeners threw themselves flat upon their faces.
Alice looked around, eager to see the Queen.
First came ten soldiers carrying clubs.
These were all shaped like the gardeners.
They were oblong and flat with their hands and feet at the corners.
Next, ten diamond courtiers marched in two by two.
The royal children, ten of them covered in hearts, followed holding hands and jumping along.
Next came the guests.
Many of them were kings and queens.
The White Rabbit followed behind.
He looked nervous as he smiled at everyone.
He didn't seem to notice Alice as he rushed by her.
The next to appear was the Knave of Hearts carrying the King's crown on a velvet cushion.
The last to join the grand procession were the King and Queen of Hearts.
The Queen looked at Alice.
"Who is this?"
she asked the Knave of Hearts.
The Knave simply bowed and smiled.
"Idiot," she barked.
She turned and stared at Alice. 
"What's your name, child?"
"My name is Alice," Alice replied.
Then she muttered to herself, "They're only a pack of cards, after all.
I needn't be afraid of them."
The Queen pointed to the gardeners. 
"And who exactly are they?"
For when she saw them lying facedown, she could see the patterns on their backs.
They were part of the pack.
She couldn't tell if they were gardeners, soldiers, or even her own children.
"How should I know?" said Alice, a bit surprised at her own courage.
"It's no business of mine."
The Queen's face grew red with anger. 
"Off with her head!"
"Nonsense," said Alice in a loud voice.
The Queen was shocked and stood with her mouth open.
The King urged the Queen, "She's but a child."
The Queen turned to the Knave. 
"Turn them over."
The Knave did so very carefully with his foot.
"Get up," said the Queen in her shrill voice.
The gardeners got off their bellies and bowed before the Queen and the King.
The Queen walked toward the trees.
"What have you been doing here?"
 She became quite angry when she saw white, not red, roses. 
"Off with the gardeners' heads at once!"
She continued the procession leaving three soldiers behind to take care of the gardeners.
Alice protected the gardeners.
"I won't let them behead you."
First she distracted the soldiers, and then she hid the gardeners in a flowerpot.
The soldiers tried to find them.
After a few minutes, they gave up and wandered off.
When the Queen saw the soldiers and Alice rejoin the procession, she asked, "Are their heads off yet?"
"The deed is done," said the soldiers.
The Queen looked at Alice and smiled. "
Can you play croquet?"
"Yes!" shouted Alice.
"Come then," roared the Queen.
Alice quickly joined the Queen in line and wondered what would happen next.
A timid voice beside her spoke up.
"It's a very fine day, isn't it?"
It was the White Rabbit!
"A very nice day!
Yes!" said Alice.
"
Where's the Duchess?"
"Hush," said the Rabbit.
He looked over his shoulder and then whispered in her ear. 
"She's supposed to be executed today.
She boxed the Queen's ears."
Alice laughed.
"Hush," said Rabbit.
He pointed to the Queen."She'll hear you."
"Get to your places!" the Queen shouted.
Soon, people ran to all sorts of places in all sorts of directions.
Many tumbled this way and that way over each other.
Within seconds, the game began.
Alice couldn't believe her eyes!
The croquet balls were live hedgehogs!
The mallets were live flamingos!
The soldiers had to double up and make the arches using their hands and feet.
"What a curious game!"
Alice said.
In this game, there were no rules.
At least it appeared there were no rules.
Alice wasn't quite so sure.
She never heard any rules, only an angered Queen shouting, "Off with his head!"
or "Off with her head!"
over and over again.
There was constant quarrelling.
They are awfully fond of beheading people here, thought Alice.
I'm surprised anyone is still alive!
"This game is so difficult to play," said Alice."Perhaps if I could manage my flamingo, I could hit the hedgehog."
 Just when she was about to take aim, the hedgehog unrolled itself.
"It's no use!" said Alice.
"I've had more than enough of this game!"
As she started to wonder how she could disappear without being noticed, she spotted the grin of the Cheshire Cat hovering in the air.
"How are you getting on?" asked the Cat.
Alice waited until the Cat's ears appeared.
She knew there was no use speaking until it could actually hear her.
"I don't think they play fairly here.
They quarrel so much that one cannot hear herself think.
There are no rules.
It's quite odd."
"How do you like the Queen?"
"I don't like her at all," said Alice.
"She's …"Alice stopped for she noticed the Queen listening in. "
She's … likely to win so it's hardly worth finishing the game."
The Queen smiled and continued on.
"Who are you talking to?" said the King coming up to Alice.
He looked at the Cat with great curiosity.
"It's a friend of mine.
A Cheshire Cat," said Alice."Allow me to introduce you."
"I don't like the look of it at all," said the King."However, it may kiss my hand if it likes."
"I'd rather not," the Cat remarked.
"Don't look at me like that," said the King.
He moved behind Alice's back for protection.
Alice interrupted.
"A Cat is allowed to look at a King.
I read it somewhere."
"I don't like the look of it.
It must be removed at once."
The Queen passed by.
"
My dear," called the King, "have this Cat taken away."
The Queen shouted, "Off with its head!"
That was the only way she knew how to handle difficulties.
"I'll fetch the executioner myself," said the King as he hurried off.
Within minutes, the King returned.
A crowd had gathered to see what all the commotion was about.
A great argument followed.
The executioner argued that you can't cut off a head unless there is a body attached to it.
The King argued that anything that had a head could be beheaded.
The Queen argued that if something wasn't done quickly, she'd have everyone beheaded.
Alice couldn't think of anything to say except, "I think the Cat belongs to the Duchess.
Why not ask her about it?"
"She's in prison," said the Queen.
"Go fetch her," she said to the executioner.
The Cat's head began fading away.
By the time the King returned with the Duchess, it had entirely disappeared.
So the King and the executioner ran wildly about looking for it and everyone else went back to playing the game.
"You don't know how happy I am to see you again, you dear old thing," said the Duchess.
She tucked her arm into Alice's and they walked off together.
Alice was thrilled to find the Duchess with a pleasant temper.
Perhaps it was the pepper that made her so angry in the kitchen.
Alice didn't like the Duchess so close to her.
She was ugly to look at and she was exactly the right height to rest her chin on Alice's shoulder.
Alice didn't like to be rude, so she didn't protest.
The Duchess started to talk to Alice but stopped and turned pale.
When Alice looked up, she saw the Queen in front of them.
Her arms were folded and she frowned like a thunderstorm.
"A fine day, Your Majesty!" said the Duchess in a low, weak voice.
"I give you a fair warning," said the Queen to the Duchess.
"Either you or your head must be off.
Take your choice this minute."
The Duchess quickly took off and never looked back.
"Let's go on with the game," said the Queen to Alice.
Alice was too afraid to disagree, so she slowly followed the Queen back to the game.
As soon as they approached the field, the Queen started to shout, "Off with their heads!
Off with their heads!"By the end of the hour, only the Queen, the King, and Alice had been spared a sentence of execution.
This is most unpleasant, thought Alice.
Soon, only three of us will be alive.
After the game of croquet, the Queen said to Alice, "Have you seen the Mock Turtle yet?"
"No," said Alice.
"I don't even know what a Mock Turtle is."
"It's the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,"said the Queen.
"I never saw one or heard of one," said Alice."Not ever."
"Come on, then," said the Queen, "and he shall tell you his history."
As they walked away, Alice heard the King say in a low voice, "You are all pardoned."
This made Alice feel quite happy and relieved.
No one would be losing a head today.
They soon came upon a Griffin lying fast asleep in the sun.
"Up, lazy thing!" said the Queen.
"Take this young lady to see the Mock Turtle.
She wants to hear his story.
I must go back and tend to some executions I've ordered."
 She walked off, leaving Alice alone with the Griffin.
Although Alice didn't like the look of the Griffin, she figured it was safer staying with him than being left with the Queen.
The Griffin sat up and rubbed his eyes.
After the Queen was out of sight, the Griffin chuckled.
"She never executes anyone, you know."
This, of course, made Alice feel much better."What an odd Queen," said Alice. 
"Always shouting and ordering heads to be chopped off but never doing so."
Alice was glad the Queen didn't keep her word.
Alice and the Griffin had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance.
He was sitting with a sad face.
He looked lonely on a little ledge of rock.
As they came closer to him, Alice heard him sigh as if his heart would break.
They went up to the Mock Turtle.
He looked at them with large eyes full of tears.
"This here young lady," said the Griffin, "wants to know your history."
"I'll tell it to her, but please don't speak until I'm finished."
They waited for him to begin.
He sat there for a long time.
How can one ever finish the story if one never starts it?
wondered Alice.
But she waited patiently.
"Once," said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, "I was a real turtle.
When we were little, we went to school in the sea.
The master was an old turtle.
We had the best of educations.
Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with, and then the different branches of Arithmetic.
We had Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision."
"I never heard of Uglification," Alice said.
"What is it?"
The Griffin lifted up both its paws in surprise."Never heard of uglifying!"
He shook his head in disgust.
"You know what to beautify is, I suppose?"
"Yes," said Alice doubtfully, "it means to make something prettier."
"Well, then," the Griffin went on, "if you don't know what to uglify is, you are stupid."
Alice felt discouraged and didn't want to ask any more questions about it.
Instead, she turned to the Mock Turtle. 
"What else did you learn?"
"Well, there was Mystery," the Mock Turtle replied, counting out the subjects on his flippers."Mystery, ancient and modern, with Seaography.
Then we had Drawling.
The Drawling master was an old eel that used to come once a week.
He taught us Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in Coils."
"And how many hours a day did you do lessons?"asked Alice, in a hurry to change the subject.
"Ten hours the first day," said the Mock Turtle."Nine the next, and so on."
"What a curious plan!" exclaimed Alice.
"That's the reason they're called lessons," the Griffin remarked. 
"Because they lessen from day to day."
This was quite a new idea to Alice.
She thought it over a little before she made her next remark. 
"Then the eleventh day must have been a holiday?"
"Of course it was," said the Mock Turtle.
"And how did you manage on the twelfth?"
Alice went on eagerly.
"I so want to know."
"That's enough about lessons," the Griffin interrupted in a matter-of-fact tone. 
"Tell her something about the games."
The Mock Turtle sighed deeply and drew the back of one flapper across his eyes.
With tears running down his cheeks, he started to speak, "You may not have lived much under the sea.
Perhaps you were never introduced to a lobster."
Alice began to say "I ate one once" but caught herself. 
"No, never," she said.
She shook her head from side to side with great speed hoping he believed her.
"So you must have no idea what a delightful thing a Lobster Quadrille dance is then."
"No, indeed," said Alice.
"What sort of dance is it?"
The Griffin spoke up.
"You first form a line along the seashore."
"Two lines," cried the Mock Turtle.
"Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on.
Then once you clear all the jellyfish out of the way, you advance twice."
"Each time you advance, you're with a partner.
And do you know who your partner will be?
A lobster, of course!" said the Griffin.
"Of course," said the Mock Turtle, "you then throw the lobsters as far out to sea as you possibly can."
"Swim after them!" shouted the Griffin.
"You mustn't forget to swim after them."
"Turn a somersault in the sea," cried the Mock Turtle flapping about. 
"Over and over you go."
"Change lobsters again," yelled the Griffin at the top of his voice.
"Then back to land again.
That's it!" said the Mock Turtle.
The two animals that had just been jumping wildly about seconds before now sat down and looked dreadfully sad.
"It must be a very pretty dance," said Alice.
"Would you like to see a little of a Lobster Quadrille?"asked the Griffin.
"Very much indeed," said Alice.
"Let's try the first part," said the Mock Turtle to the Griffin.
"We can do it without lobsters, you know.
Which one of us shall sing?"
"Oh, you sing, you sing!" said the Griffin.
"I've forgotten the words."
So they began solemnly dancing around and around Alice.
Every now and then they stepped on her toes when they passed too close.
They waved their forepaws to mark the time while the Mock Turtle sang a slow, sad song:
"Will you walk a little faster?" said a whiting to a snail.
"There's aporpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my tail."
See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
They are waiting on the shingle - - will you come and join the dance?
will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?
You can really have no notion how delighftul it will be
When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!
But the snail replied, "Too far, too far," and gave a look askance - -
Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.
"What matters it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied.
"There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
The farther off from England the nearer is to France - -
Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance."
will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?
"Thank you!
It's a very interesting dance to watch,"said Alice feeling quite relieved it was over.
"I did so like the curious song about the whiting."
"Oh," said the Mock Turtle, "you've seen a whiting?"
"Yes," said Alice without giving much thought.
"I often see them on my dinn - - " She quickly realized that telling them she ate them for dinner was not the best idea.
"I don't know where Dinn may be," said the Mock Turtle.
"But if you've seen them, then you know what they're like?"
"I believe so," said Alice.
"They have their tails in their mouths."
"Yes!
That's right," said the Mock Turtle turning to the Griffin.
"Tell her why they have their tails in their mouths."
"The reason," said the Griffin, "is that they would go with the lobsters to the dance.
So they were thrown out to sea.
They had to fall a long way.
So they got their tails stuck in their mouths and couldn't get them back out.
That's all."
"Thank you," said Alice trying her best to be polite.
"I never knew so much about a whiting before.
It's all very interesting."
"Now, come.
Let's hear some of your adventures," said the Griffin to Alice, after the dance.
"I'm sure you have lots to share with us."
"I could tell you my adventures.
Especially if I begin from this morning," said Alice, a little timidly.
 "But it's no use going back to yesterday because I was a different person then."
"Explain all that," said the Mock Turtle.
"No, no!
The adventure first!" said the Griffin impatiently.
"Explanations take such a dreadful long time."
So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first saw the White Rabbit.
After a while, the Griffin asked, "Would you like to dance again or shall the Mock Turtle sing you a song?"
"A song if you please," said Alice.
"Sing her 'Turtle Soup,' will you old fellow?"
When Mock Turtle finished, the Griffin cried out, "Sing it again.
Sing it again."
The Mock Turtle had opened his mouth to sing once again when the cries of "The trial's beginning!The trial's beginning!" were heard in the distance.
"Come on!" cried the Griffin.
And, taking Alice by the hand, they hurried off.
"What trial is it?"
Alice panted, as she ran.
But the Griffin only answered, "Come on!" and ran faster.
The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when Alice and the Griffin arrived.
A great crowd had assembled around the thrones.
The Knave stood before them in chains.
A soldier stood on each side of the Knave to guard him.
Standing near the King was the White Rabbit.
He held a trumpet in one hand and a scroll of parchment in the other.
In the very middle of the court was a table with a large dish of tarts.
They looked so delicious that it made Alice quite hungry just to look at them.
I wish they'd get the trial done, she thought, and hand out the refreshments.
But there seemed to be no chance of this.
So she started looking at everything around her to pass the time.
Alice had never been in a court before but took pride that she knew so much about it from her studies.
"That's the judge," she pointed out, "because he's wearing a great wig."
The judge was really the King wearing his crown over his wig and looking quite silly. "
And that's the jury box over there with those twelve creatures inside.
" The jurors were writing on their slates.
"What are they doing?" asked Alice.
The trial hadn't yet started.
The Griffin replied.
"They're writing their names down now in case they forget them by the end of the trial."
"How silly," she started to say but closed her mouth quickly.
The White Rabbit had called out,"Silence in the court."
The King had put his glasses on to see who was making all the noise.
"Herald!" blasted the King.
"Read the charges."
The White Rabbit stood and blew his trumpet three times.
He unrolled the parchment paper, cleared his throat, and read:
The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
All on a summer day:
The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts
And took them quite away.
"Consider your verdict," said the King.
"Not yet!
Not yet!" said the Rabbit.
"There's a great deal to come before that!
We cannot consider a verdict yet."
The King rolled his eyes.
"Call the first witness then."
The White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, "First witness!"
The first witness was the Hatter.
He came in with a teacup in one hand and a piece of bread and butter in the other.
"I beg your pardon, Your Majesty," he began, "for bringing these into the court.
But I hadn't quite finished my tea when I was sent for."
"Take off your hat," the King said to the Hatter.
"It isn't mine," said the Hatter.
"Stolen!"
the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made a memo of the fact.
"I keep them to sell," the Hatter added as an explanation.
"I'm a Hatter, you know."
The Queen put on her glasses and stared hard at the Hatter.
The Hatter turned pale and fidgeted.
"Give your evidence," said the King, "and don't be nervous or I'll have you executed on the spot."
This did not seem to encourage the witness at all.
He shifted from one foot to the other and looked uneasily at the Queen.
In his confusion, he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the bread and butter.
Just at this moment, Alice felt a very curious sensation.
This puzzled her a good deal until she figured out she was beginning to grow larger again!She thought at first that she should get up and leave the court.
Then she decided to remain where she was as long as there was room for her.
"I do wish you wouldn't squeeze me so," said the Dormouse, who was sitting next to her.
"I can hardly breathe."
"I can't help it," said Alice.
"I'm growing."
"You have no right to grow here," said the Dormouse.
"Of course I do!
You're growing here, too," said Alice.
"But I grow at a normal pace.
You grow at a ridiculous one."
With that, he got up and moved to the other side of the room.
The King boomed.
"As I said, I'll have you executed if I don't hear your evidence.
I don't care how nervous you are."
"I'm a poor man, Your Majesty," the Hatter began in a trembling voice.
"I hadn't but just begun my tea.
Not above a week or so.
And with the bread and butter getting so thin and the twinkling of the tea."
"The twinkling of what?" asked the King.
"It began with the tea," said the Hatter.
"Of course, twinkling begins with a T!" said the King sharply.
"
Do you take me for a dunce?
Go on!"
"I'm a poor man," the Hatter went on, "and most things twinkled after that.
Only the March Hare said - - "
"I didn't!"
the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.
"I didn't say a word."
"You did!" said the Hatter.
"I deny it!" said the March Hare.
"All of it."
"He denies it," said the King.
"Leave out that part."
"After that," said the Hatter, "I cut some more bread and butter."
"What did the Dormouse say?" asked a juror.
"I can't remember," said the Hatter.
"You must remember," said the King, "or I'll have you executed."
The Hatter dropped to one knee.
"I'm a poor man, Your Majesty."
"You're a poor speaker," said the King.
One of the guinea pigs cheered and was immediately taken out of the court. 
"Ah," said Alice.
"I've read that judges warn others not to applaud at the end of a trial.
Now I know what happens if they do."
 She was quite pleased with herself.
"And if that's all you know about it, you may go,"said the King.
The Hatter left the court in a hurry without even waiting to put on his shoes.
"Just take his head off outside," the Queen said to one of the officers.
But the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could get to the door.
"Call the next witness!" said the King.
The next witness was the cook.
She carried the pepper shaker in her hand.
Alice knew it was the cook even before she entered the court because everyone started to sneeze.
"Give your evidence," said the King.
"Can't," said the cook. 
"Won't."
The King spoke. 
"Well then, tell me, what are the tarts made of?"
"Pepper mostly," said the cook.
"Molasses," said a sleepy voice behind her.
It was the Dormouse.
The Queen shrieked.
"Get the Dormouse out of here.
Behead him!
Off with his whiskers!"
The whole court became a chaotic scene as they removed the Dormouse.
By the time everyone settled back into their seats, the cook had disappeared.
"Never mind," said the King.
"Call the next witness."
Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list.
She was feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like. "
For they haven't got much evidence yet," she said to herself. 
"Not much at all."
Imagine her surprise when the White Rabbit read aloud the next name on the list: "Alice!"
"Here!" cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes.
She jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jury box.
This caused all the jury members to tumble over onto the heads of the crowd below.
The jurors lay sprawled about.
It reminded Alice very much of a fishbowl of goldfish that she had accidentally knocked over the week before.
"Oh, I beg your pardon!"
she exclaimed.
She picked up each juror as quickly as she could.
She feared if they weren't put back immediately into the jury box, they would die just like the goldfish.
"The trial cannot proceed," said the King in a grave voice, "until all the jurors are back in their proper places.
All the jurors."
 As he stressed the word all, he glared at Alice.
Alice quickly looked at the juror box.
In her rushing about, she saw that she had put the Lizard in headfirst.
The poor little thing was waving its tail about.
She soon plucked it out and placed it in the right way.
Much better!
The jury soon recovered from the shock of being knocked every which way.
Their slates and pencils were handed back to them and they set to work.
All started to diligently write out a history of the accident.
All except the Lizard, who seemed too overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open and gaze up at the roof.
"What do you know about this business?" the King asked Alice.
"Nothing," said Alice.
"Nothing at all?" persisted the King.
"Nothing at all," said Alice.
"That's very important," the King said, turning to the jury.
They were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rabbit interrupted.
"Unimportant, your Majesty.
You meant it was unimportant, of course," he said, in a very respectful tone.
But at the same time, he made strange faces at the King as he spoke.
"Unimportant!
Of course, I meant unimportant,"the King hastily said.
Then he started whispering to himself, "Important, unimportant.
Unimportant, important."
 It was as if he were trying to see which word sounded best.
Some jurors, Alice could see, wrote down the word important and others wrote down unimportant.
But it doesn't matter, thought Alice.
It makes no sense.
The King, who had been busily writing in his notebook, called out "Silence!"
Then he read from his book, "Rule forty-two.
All persons more than a mile high must leave the court."
Everybody looked at Alice.
She was feeling brave.
"I'm not a mile high."
"You are," said the King as he looked her over."You most certainly are."
"Nearly two miles high," added the Queen.
"Yes, at least two miles high."
"Well, I won't go," said Alice.
"Besides, that's not a regular rule.
You invented it just now."
"It's the oldest rule in the book," said the King.
"Then it ought to be number one," said Alice."How important can it be if it's rule number forty-two?"
The King turned pale and shut his notebook.
"Consider your verdict," he said to the jury in a low, trembling voice.
"There's more evidence to come," said the Rabbit."This paper for instance."
"What is it?" asked the Queen.
"I haven't opened it yet," said the White Rabbit."But it seems to be a letter written by the prisoner to somebody."
"Who is it addressed to?" asked a member of the jury.
"No one," said the Rabbit.
"In fact, there's nothing written on the outside."
He unfolded the paper and raised his brow.
"It isn't a letter at all but a set of verses."
"Is it the prisoner's handwriting?" asked another jury member.
"No, it's not," said the Rabbit.
The jury looked disappointed.
"Then he must have imitated someone else's hand writing," said the King.
The jury brightened up again.
"Please, your Majesty," said the Knave.
"I didn't write it.
They can't prove I did.
There's no name signed at the end."
"If you didn't sign it," said the King, "that only makes matters worse.
You must have meant some mischief.
If not, you would have signed your name like an honest man."
Everyone clapped.
It was the first clever thing the King had said that day.
"That proves his guilt, of course," said the Queen."So, off with his head!"
"It doesn't prove anything," said Alice.
"You don't even know what the verses are about."
"Read them," said the King.
The White Rabbit put on his glasses.
There was dead silence in the court while he read the set of verses aloud:
"They told me you had been to her,
And mentioned me to him:
She gave me a good character,
But said I could not swim.
He sent them word I had not gone
(We know it to be true):
If she should push the matter on,
What would become of you?
I gave her one, they gave him two,
You gave us three or more:
They all returned from him to you,
Though they were mine before.
If I or she should chance to be
Involved in this affair,
He trusts to you to set them free,
Exactly as they were.
My notion was that you had been
(before she had this fit)
An obstacle that came between
Him, ourselves, and it.
Don't let him know she liked them best,
For this must ever be
A secret, kept from all the rest,
Between yourself and me."
"That's the most important piece of evidence we've heard," said the King.
"But can anyone explain the meaning of it?"asked Alice.
"I don't think there is any meaning to it at all.
If anyone can prove me wrong, I'll give him sixpence.
" She had grown so tall in the last few minutes that she wasn't a bit afraid to interrupt the King.
"If there's no meaning to it, it makes it even easier," said the King.
He spread the verses out on the table.
"One verse says 'can't swim.'"
He looked at the Knave.
"You can't swim, can you?"
The Knave shook his cardboard head sadly.
The King went on muttering the verses.
"We know it to be true.
That's the jury!
If she should push the matter on.
That must be the Queen!
I gave her one, they gave him two.
Why that must be what he did with the tarts."
"But it goes on," said Alice."They all returned from him to you."
"Why there they are," said the King pointing to the tarts on the table.
"Nothing can be clearer than that!"
Then he scratched his head. 
"Then again, before she had this fit.
You never had fits, my dear,"he said to the Queen.
"Never," said the Queen throwing an inkstand as she spoke.
"Let the jury consider the verdict," said the King.
"No, no!" said the Queen.
"
Sentence first.
Verdict afterward."
"Stuff and nonsense!" said Alice loudly.
"
The idea of having the sentence first!
Whoever heard of such a strange thing?"
"Hold your tongue!" said the Queen.
"I won't!" said Alice.
"Off with her head!" the Queen shouted.
Nobody moved.
"Who cares for you?" said Alice, who had grown to her full size by this time.
"You're nothing but a pack of cards!"
At these words, the whole pack of cards rose up into the air and came flying down upon Alice.
She screamed and tried to beat them off.
Suddenly, she found herself lying on the bank with her head in the lap of her sister.
Her sister gently brushed away some dead leaves that had fluttered down from the trees on her face.
"Wake up, Alice dear!" said her sister. "
Why, what a long sleep you've had!"
"Oh, I've had such a curious dream!" said Alice.
She told her sister, as well as she could remember them, all her strange adventures.
When she had finished, her sister said, "It was a curious dream.
But now run to your tea.
It's getting late."
So Alice ran off, thinking, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been.