It was New Year's Eve.
An aged man was standing at a window.
He raised his mournful eyes towards the deep blue sky, where the stars were floating like white lilies on the surface of a clear calm lake.
Then he cast them on the earth, where few more hopeless people than himself now moved towards their certain goal - the tomb.
He had already passed sixty of the stages leading to it, and he had brought from his journey nothing but errors and remorse.
Now his health was poor, his mind vacant, his heart sorrowful, and his old age short of comforts.
The days of his youth appeared like dreams before him, and he recalled the serious moment when his father placed him at the entrance of the two roads: one leading to a peaceful, sunny place, covered with flowers, fruits and resounding with soft, sweet songs; the other leading to a deep, dark cave, which was endless, where poison flowed instead of water and where devils and poisonous snakes hissed and crawled.
He looked towards the sky and cried painfully, "O youth, return!
O my father, place me once more at the entrance to life, and I'll choose the better way! "
But both his father and the days of his youth had passed away.
He saw the lights flowing away in the darkness.
These were the days of his wasted life; he saw a star fall from the sky and disappeared, and this was the symbol of himself.
His remorse, which was like a sharp arrow, struck deeply into his heart.
Then he remembered his friends in his childhood, who entered on life together with him.
But they had made their way to success and were now honored and happy on this New Year's Eve.
The clock in the high church tower struck and the sound made him remember his parents' early love for him.
They had taught him and prayed to God for his good.
But he chose the wrong way.
With shame and grief he dared no longer look towards that heaven where his father lives.
His darkened eyes were full of tears, and with a despairing effort, he burst out a cry, "Come back, my early days!
Come back! "
And his youth did return, for all this was only a dream which he had on New Year's Eve.
He was still young though his faults were real; he had not yet entered the deep, dark cave, and he was still free to walk on the road which leads to the peaceful and sunny land.
Those who still linger on the entrance of life, hesitating to choose the bright road, remember that when years are passed and your feet stumble on the dark mountains, you will cry bitterly, but in vain, "O youth, return!
Oh, give me back my early days! "
If I were a boy again, I would cultivate courage. "
Nothing is so mild and gentle as courage, nothing so cruel and pitiless as cowardice."
says a wise author.
We too often borrow trouble, and anticipate that may never appear. "
The fear of ill exceeds the ill we fear. "
Dangers will arise in any career, but the presence of mind will often conquer the worst of them.
Be prepared for any fate, and there is no harm to be feared.
If I were a boy again, I would look on the cheerful side.
Life is very much like a mirror: if you smile upon it, it smiles back upon you; but if you frown and look doubtful on it, you will get a similar look in return.
Inner sunshine warms not only the heart of the owner, but of all that come in contact with it. "
Who shuts love out, in turn shall be shut out from love. "
If I were a boy again, I would school myself to say "no" more often.
I might write pages on the importance of learning very early in life to gain that point where a young boy can stand erect, and decline doing an unworthy act because it is unworthy.
If I were a boy again, I would demand of myself more courtesy towards my companions and friends, and indeed towards strangers as well.
The smallest courtesies along the rough roads of life are like the little birds that sing to us all winter long, and make that season of ice and snow more endurable.
Finally, instead of trying hard to be happy, as if that were the sole purpose of life, I would, if I were a boy again, I would still try harder to make others happy.
In the summertime, when school was out and we were spending our vacation in New Jersey, my brother and I always were up, dressed and downstairs at dawn.
Our alarm clock was the sound of our grandfather tossing birch and maple logs into the old wood stove and rattling the dented kettles as he warmed water with which to shave.
Part of the attraction was breakfast.
We never knew just what kind of concoction Grandpa would make.
But in the eyes of two boys, eight and twelve years old, you could be sure that it would be something startling.
One of his favorites was a bowl of shredded wheat, garnished with slices of banana, sprinkled with blueberries he had picked himself, amply basted with thick New Jersey cream and topped with crumbles of bacon and a steaming-hot poached egg.
Looking back, perhaps the ingredients of Grandpa's "Sunrise Sundae" were not as surprising as was the realization that this 67-year-old, rumple-topped apparition in baggy work pants and scuffed shoes, was a former Yale University dean, Wilbur Lucius Cross, then serving the first of what were to be four terms as distinguished Governor of Connecticut.
" Well…" he would say to us as we burst into the kitchen, "it's a beautiful day for it, isn't it? "
" Yes, Grandpa," we would agree, glancing expectantly at each other.
It was a beautiful day for it.
Now all we had to do was waiting and seeing what "it" happened to be.
I recalled one cold, drizzly August morning when Grandpa came out on the porch to greet a caller. "
Beautiful day for it," he said.
The caller looked puzzled, wiping the rain off his forehead.
What he had come for was to call off the proposed outing for that afternoon.
He was afraid "the old gentleman" would catch pneumonia.
At Grandpa's reaction to the weather he changed his mind.
The outing was a big success.
On another occasion, this time in the middle of winter, he greeted a boy my age and his mother with "beautiful day," apparently oblivious to the fact that a wet snowfall was freezing into ice.
The mother merely gave a nervous laugh, but the boy responded eagerly, "You bet, Dr. Cross.
My buddy and I are going up tile hill with cardboard boxes and have an ice slide! "
It was two years after his retirement as Dean of the Yale Graduate School that he ran for Governor of Connecticut and was - to the great surprise of everyone, including his Democratic party, which had not had a governor in 35 years, elected by a slim margin.
When asked why, at the age of 67, he had committed himself to the rough and tumble political life, he would reply, "Men and women of faith have a responsibility to enter politics. "
If it were sunny, he might head for the yard, to scythe the tall grass.
If rainy, he would usually stoke up the old pot-bellied stove in the dining room, then settle down with books and pads and enjoy a truly beautiful day, beautiful for reflecting and writing.
How many days were wasted, he used to caution us, because the weather would not cooperate with what people had planned.
Grandpa is gone now, but never forgotten.
I always remember him somehow when rain or snow has interfered with plans we have made for our children.
I like to wonder what my grandfather would have devised for the occasion.
No time for a picnic, perhaps, but certainly a beautiful day, for something.
I remember my Landon Junior High School seventh grade, math teacher's name very well.
It was Mr. Dawson.
He stood out because the kids made fun of him.
He was missing one of his fingers, and always pointed at students with his middle finger.
For some reason I was not very good in school.
English and Math were my worst two subjects.
There was just something wrong with me, inside my head.
No matter how hard I tried, I just could not figure out why I did not understand what all the other kids found so easy to learn.
I don't think there was ever a day I went to school that I was not afraid.
One day, I was told by Mrs. Hunt, the head matron of the Children's Home Society Orphanage, that if I got one more E on my report card, I would be taken to the Juvenile Court in downtown Jacksonville, Florida.
She would tell the judge to send me away to the big prison for kids.
I tried really hard for weeks to learn how to multiply, do fractions, and compound things.
I just couldn't understand how to make different parts of numbers into whole things; my brain just couldn't do it, no matter how hard I tried.
The day before report cards were to come out, I knew that Mr. Dawson would give me an E, just like he always did.
After class ended, I went to Mr. Dawson and told him that the orphanage was going to send me to the big prison if I got another E on my report card.
He told me there was nothing he could do; it would be unfair to the other kids if he gave me a better grade than I had actually earned.
I smiled at him, turned and walked towards the door, and then I stopped.
I looked at the teacher and said, "Mr. Dawson, you know how all the kids make fun of you because you're missing your finger? "
He looked at me, moved his mouth to one side, like he was biting the inside of his gum, and said nothing.
" They shouldn't do that to you because you can't help not having a finger, Mr. Dawson.
Just like I can't help not being able to learn numbers and stuff like that," I said.
Again, he said nothing as he looked down at his desk, and began grading papers.
The next day, when I got my report card, I tucked it into one of my books.
While on the school bus, I opened the report card envelope and looked at my grades: Geography, B+; Mechanical Drawing, C-; English, D-; History, C-; Gym, B+; Art, C; Math, D-.
That math grade was the most favorite one I ever received in my whole life.
Not because I didn't get sent to the big prison for kids, but because I knew that someone in the world finally understood what it was like for me to be missing a finger inside my head.
My newly-wed husband said the same thing every morning, "You're beautiful today. "
One glance in the mirror revealed that it was far from the truth.
A skinny girl with mashed hair on one side of her head and no makeup smiled back at me.
I could feel my sticky morning breath.
"Liar," I shot back with a grin.
It was my usual response.
My mother's first husband was not a kind man and his verbal and physical abuse forced her and her two children to find a safe place.
He showed up on her doorstep one day with roses.
She let him in and he beat her with those roses and took advantage of her.
Nine months later she gave birth to a 9 lb.
13 oz.
baby girl - me.
The harsh words we heard growing up took root.
I had trouble seeing myself as someone of value.
I had been married two years when I surprised myself.
My husband wrapped his arms around me and told me I was beautiful.
"Thank you," I said.
The same thin girl with the mousy brown hair still stared back at me in the mirror, but somehow the words had finally blossomed in my heart.
A lot of years have passed.
My husband has grey in his hair.
I'm no longer skinny.
Last week I woke up and my husband's face was inches from mine.
" What are you doing? "
I asked.
I covered my mouth, trying to hide my morning breath.
He reached down and kissed my face.
" What I do every morning," he said.
He leaves in the early hours of the morning while I sleep.
I miss our morning conversations, but I had not realized that he continued to tell me that he loved me even while I slept.
When he left, I rolled over and hugged my pillow.
I envisioned the picture of me lightly snoring with my mouth open and giggled.
What a man!
My husband understands my past.
He's been beside me as I've grown from an unsure young girl to a confident woman, mother, speaker and author.
But I'm not sure that he understands the part he played in that transition.
The words I heard growing up pierced my soul, yet his words pierced even deeper.
This Anniversary Day I plan to wake early.
I want to tell Richard how much I love him.
He may look in the mirror and see an extra pound or two, or wish for the day when his hair was dark and curly, but all I'll see is the man who saw something in me when I couldn't see it myself, and who leaves butterfly kisses, even after twenty-three years of marriage.
At Christmas time men and women everywhere gather in their churches to wonder anew at the greatest miracle the world has ever known.
But the story I like best to recall is not a miracle - not exactly.
It happened to a pastor who was very young but his church was very old.
Once long ago it had flourished.
Famous men had preached from its pulpit and prayed before its altar.
Rich and poor alike had worshipped there and built it beautifully.
Now the good days had passed from the section of town where it stood.
But the pastor and his young wife believed in their rundown church.
They felt that with paint, hammer, and faith they could get it in shape.
Together they went to work.
However, late in December a severe storm whipped through the river valley and the worst blow fell on the little church - a huge chunk of rain-soaked plaster fell out of the inside wall just behind the altar.
Sorrowfully the pastor and his wife swept away the mess but they couldn't hide the ragged hole.
The pastor looked at it and had to remind himself quickly, "That will be done!"
But his wife wept, "Christmas is only two days away! "
That afternoon the dispirited couple attended an auction held for the benefit of a youth group.
The auctioneer opened a box and shook out a folded handsome gold and ivory lace tablecloth.
It was a magnificent item, nearly 15 feet long; but it, too, dated from a long vanished era.
Who, today, had any use for such a thing?
There were a few halfhearted bids.
Then the pastor was seized with what he thought was a great idea.
He bid it in for $6.50.
He carried the cloth back to the church and tacked it up on the wall behind the altar.
It completely hid the hole!
And the extraordinary beauty of its shimmering handwork cast a fine, holiday glow over the chancel.
It was a great triumph.
Happily he went back to prepare his Christmas sermon.
Just before noon on the day of Christmas Eve as the pastor was opening the church, he noticed a woman standing in the cold at the bus stop. "
The bus won't be here for 40 minutes! "
he called and invited her into the church to get warm.
She told him that she had come from the city that morning to be interviewed for a job as governess to the children of one of the wealthy families in town but she had been turned down.
A war refugee, her English was imperfect.
The woman sat down in a pew and chafed her hands and rested.
After a while she dropped her head and prayed.
She looked up as the pastor began to adjust the great gold and ivory cloth across the hole.
She rose suddenly and walked up the steps of the chancel.
She looked at the tablecloth.
The pastor smiled and started to tell her about the storm damage but she didn't seem to listen.
She took up a fold of the cloth and rubbed it between her fingers. "
It is mine!"
she said, "It is my banquet cloth!"
She lifted up a corner and showed the surprised pastor that there were initials monogrammed on it. "
My husband had the cloth made especially for me in Brussels!
There could not be another like it. "
For the next few minutes the woman and the pastor talked excitedly together.
She explained that she was Viennese and that she and her husband had opposed the Nazis and decided to leave the country.
They were advised to go separately.
Her husband put her on a train for Switzerland.
They planned that he would join her as soon as he could arrange to ship their household goods across the border.
She never saw him again.
Later she heard that he had died in a concentration camp. "
I have always felt that it was my fault - to leave without him," she said. "
Perhaps these years of wandering have been my punishment!"
The pastor tried to comfort her and urged her to take the cloth with her.
She refused.
Then she went away.
As the church began to fill on Christmas Eve, it was clear that the cloth was going to be a great success.
It had been skillfully designed to look its best by candlelight.
After the service, the pastor stood at the doorway.
Many people told him that the church looked beautiful.
One gentle-faced middle-aged man - he was the local clock-and-watch repairman - looked rather puzzled. "
It is strange," he said in his soft accent, "many years ago my wife - God rest her - and I owned such a cloth.
In our home in Vienna, my wife put it on the table," - and here he smiled - "only when the bishop came to dinner. "
The pastor suddenly became very excited.
He told the repairman about the woman who had been in church earlier that day.
The startled repairman clutched the pastor's arm, "Can it be?
Does she live? "
Together the two got in touch with the family who had interviewed her.
Then in the pastor's car they started for the city.
And as Christmas Day was born, this man and his wife who had been separated through so many saddened Yule tides were reunited.
To all who hear this story, the joyful purpose of the storm that had knocked a hole in the wall of the church was now quite clear.
Of course, people said it was a miracle; but I think you will agree it was the season for it!
Edward Wellman bade goodbye to his family in the old country headed for a better life in America.
Papa handed him the family's savings hidden in a leather satchel. "
Times are desperate here," he said, hugging his son goodbye. "
You are our hope. "
Edward boarded the Atlantic freighter offering free transport to young men willing to shovel coal in return for the month-long journey.
If Edward struck gold in the Colorado Rockies, the rest of the family could eventually join him.
For months, Edward worked his claim tirelessly, and the small vein of gold provided a moderate but steady income.
At the end of each day, as he walked through the door of his two-room cabin, he yearned for the woman he loved to greet him.
Leaving Ingrid behind before he could officially court her had been his only regret in accepting this American adventure.
Their families had been friends for years and for as long as he could remember; he had secretly hoped to make Ingrid his wife.
Her long, flowing hair and radiant smile made her the most beautiful of the Henderson sisters.
He had just begun sitting by her at church picnics and making up silly reasons to stop by her house, just so he could see her.
As he went to sleep in his cabin each night, Edward longed to stroke her auburn hair and hold her in his arms.
Finally, he wrote to Papa, asking him to help make this dream come true.
After nearly a year, a telegraph came with a plan to make his life complete.
Mr. Henderson had agreed to send his daughter to Edward in America.
Because she was a hardworking young woman with a good mind for business, she would work alongside Edward for a year to help the mining business grow.
By then both families could afford to come to America for their wedding.
Edward's heart soared with joy as he spent the next month trying to make the cabin into a home.
He bought a cot for him to sleep on in the living area and tried to make his former bedroom suitable for a woman.
Floral cloth from flour sacks replaced the burlap-bag curtains covering the grimy window.
He arranged dried sage from the meadow into a tin can vase on the nightstand.
At last, the day he had been waiting for his whole life arrived.
With a bouquet of fresh-picked daisies in hand, he left for the train depot.
Steam billowed and wheels screeched as the train crawled to a stop.
Edward scanned every window looking for Ingrid's glowing hair and smile.
His heart beat with eager anticipation, then stopped with a sinking thud.
Not Ingrid, but her older sister Marta, stepped down from the train.
She stood shyly before him, her eyes cast down.
Edward only stared - dumbfounded.
Then with shaking hands he offered Marta the bouquet. "
Welcome," he whispered, his eyes burning.
A smile etched across her plain face.
" I was pleased when Papa said you sent for me," Marta said, looking into his eyes briefly, before dropping her head again.
" I'll get your bags," Edward said with a fake smile.
Together they headed for the buggy.
Mr. Henderson and Papa were right.
Marta did have a great grasp of business.
While Edward worked the mine, she worked the office.
From her makeshift desk in one corner of the living area, she kept detailed records of all claim activity.
Within six months, their assets doubled.
Her delicious meals and quiet smile graced the cabin with a wonderful woman's touch.
But the wrong woman, Edward mourned as he collapsed onto his cot each night.
Why did they send Marta?
Would he ever see Ingrid again?
Was his lifelong dream to have her as his wife forsaken?
For a year, Marta and Edward worked and played and laughed, but never loved.
Once, Marta had kissed Edward on the cheek before retiring to her room.
He only smiled awkwardly.
From then on, she seemed content with their exhilarating hikes in the mountains and long talks on the porch after suppers.
One spring afternoon, torrential rains washed down the hillside, eroding the entrance to their mine.
Furiously, Edward filled sand bags and stacked them in the water's path.
Soaked and exhausted, his frantic efforts seemed futile.
Suddenly there was Marta at his side holding the next burlap-bag open.
Edward shoveled sand inside, then with the strength of any man, Marta hurled it onto the pile and opened another bag … For hours they worked, knee-deep in mud, until the rains diminished.
Hand in hand, they walked back to the cabin.
Over warm soup Edward sighed, "I never could have saved the mine without you.
Thank you, Marta. "
" You're welcome", she answered with her usual smile, then went quietly to her room.
A few days later, a telegraph came announcing the arrival of the Henderson and Wellman families next week.
As much as he tried to stifle it, the thought of seeing Ingrid again started Edward's heart beating in the old familiar way.
Together, he and Marta went to the train station.
They watched as their families exited the train at the far end of the platform.
When Ingrid appeared, Marta turned to Edward. "
Go to her," she said.
Astonished, Edward stammered, "What do you mean? "
" Edward, I have always known I was not the Henderson girl you intended to send for.
I had watched you flirt with Ingrid at the church picnics. "
She nodded toward her sister descending the train steps. "
I know it is she, not me, you desire for your wife. "
" But…"
Marta placed her fingers over his lips. "
Shhh," she hushed him. "
I do love you, Edward.
I always have.
And because of that, all I really want is your happiness.
Go to her. "
He took her hand from his face and held it.
As she gazed up at him, he saw for the first time how very beautiful she was.
He recalled their walks in the meadows, their quiet evenings before the fire, her working beside him with the sandbags.
It was then he realized what he had known for months.
" No, Marta.
It is you I want. "
Sweeping her into his arms, he kissed her with all the love bursting inside him.
Their families gathered around them chorusing, "We are here for the wedding! "
Nearly thirty years ago I was a trainee engineer based in Liverpool.
I was hundreds of miles from home, but I had a nice place to live, wasn't overworked, had a good bunch of friends and plenty of money in my pocket.
One Saturday morning I decided to walk into Liverpool city centre and buy myself something.
I didn't need anything, I was just going to spend some money!
The walk was about four miles and took me through Toxteth, an area which two years later would erupt into rioting, largely because of the poverty of the place.
I stopped in a newsagent, or general store to buy myself some sweets for the walk.
While I was making up my mind the door opened and in walked this "ragamuffin".
It looked like she might have been four years old (at the most).
She was wearing a summer dress and sandals even though it was a bitterly cold day, and she was not clean.
She walked up to the counter, reached up and placed a fifty pence coin on the glass.
Then, she proudly announced that she had saved this up for her little brother's birthday and she wanted to buy him a teddy bear and she wanted that one there.
The woman behind the counter told the little girl the teddy cost more than 50p.
The girl tried another one, and another one, and another one.
By this time I was engrossed.
I knew that none of the bears on display could be bought for 50p.
I also knew that I could easily buy the best bear there with the money I was going to waste that day, but did I want to encourage a little girl to take money from strangers?
While I dithered, the little ragamuffin turned, the smile in her voice undimmed. "
Oh well," she announced to the world, "I'll just give him mine then. "
Her words echoed after she left. "
I'll just give him mine", didn't sound like she was going to give him ONE of her teddies.
She was going to give her little brother HER teddy, probably the only teddy she had!
I bet if I found the woman that little girl become, she wouldn't even remember that day, but I do.
Vividly!
Days like that can change the course of a life.
In a remote mountain valley, there was a cliff with the height of a thousand feet.
Nobody knows when on the precipice a small lily began to exist.
When the lily was born, it was entirely alike with the weed.
But in its heart she knew she was not a weed.
In the depth of her heart, there was an intrinsic innocent thought: "I am a flower called lily, not a weed.
The only method to prove myself is to start out beautiful flowers. "
With this thought, the lily diligently took up water and the sunlight, got deeply rooted and stood straight.
Finally in an early spring morning, the crown of the lily tied the first calyx.
In the lily's heart she was very happy, but the neighbor weeds disdained it very much.
They were laughing at the lily in secret: " This fellow is obviously the grass, but she insists that she is a flower.
On her head, it is not a calyx, but a brain lump. "
Even in public situation, they ridiculed the lily: "Don't dream any more.
Even if you really can blossom, in this wild, your value is the same as ours. "
Occasionally, bees, butterflies and birds also urged the lily not to bloom so hard: "On this precipice, even if you start out the most beautiful flower in the world, people cannot appreciate you! "
The lily said, "I must blossom because I know I have the beautiful flower.
I want to blossom to fulfill my dignified life as a flower; I must blossom to prove my own existence.
No matter who will appreciate, no matter how others look at me, I must and will blossom! "
Though despised by all others, the wild lily released her inner feelings diligently.
One day, she finally blossomed.
With that intelligent white and graceful bearing, it became the most beautiful one on the cliff.
At this time, all other plants and insects didn't dare to ridicule her.
The lily was being in full bloom.
On the flowers there were crystal-like water drops every day.
The wild grasses thought that they were dew.
Only the lily knew that they were tears of extreme happiness.
Every spring, the wild lily tried its best to bloom.
Year after year, its seeds along with the wind flew into nearby mountain valleys, prairie and cliff.
And then, there were wild lilies everywhere.
Dozens of years later, people in cities and countryside hundred of miles away from the cliff came to appreciate these lilies.
Many kids bent down to smell their fragrance.
Many lovers hugged each other and swore that they would stay together forever.
Countless people were moved into tears, for their pure and tender hearts were touched by this beauty never seen before.
Later on, that place was called "Lilies Valley".
In spite of others' appreciation, lilies all over the mountain still remember the first lily's teaching by heart, that is, "We should bloom with all our mind, never argue with others and prove our existence with blooms. "
Five score years ago, a great American, in whose symbolic shadow we stand today, signed the Emancipation Proclamation.
This momentous decree came as a great beacon light of hope to millions of Negro slaves who had been seared in the flames of withering injustice.
It came as a joyous daybreak to end the long night of their captivity.
But one hundred years later, the Negro still is not free.
One hundred years later, the life of the Negro is still sadly crippled by the manacles of segregation and the chains of discrimination.
One hundred years later, the Negro lives on a lonely island of poverty in the midst of a vast ocean of material prosperity.
One hundred years later, the Negro is still languished in the corners of American society and finds himself an exile in his own land.
And so we've come here today to dramatize a shameful condition.
...
And so even though we face the difficulties of today and tomorrow, I still have a dream.
It is a dream deeply rooted in the American dream.
I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed: "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal. "
I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia, the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave owners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood.
I have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi, a state sweltering with the heat of injustice, sweltering with the heat of oppression, will be transformed into an oasis of freedom and justice.
I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.
I have a dream today!
I have a dream that one day, down in Alabama, with its vicious racists, with its governor having his lips dripping with the words of "interposition" and "nullification" - one day right there in Alabama little black boys and black girls will be able to join hands with little white boys and white girls as sisters and brothers.
I have a dream today!
I have a dream that one day every valley shall be exalted, and every hill and mountain shall be made low, the rough places will be made plain, and the crooked places will be made straight, "and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed and all flesh shall see it together. "
This is our hope, and this is the faith that I go back to the South with.
With this faith, we will be able to hew out of the mountain of despair a stone of hope.
With this faith, we will be able to transform the jangling discords of our nation into a beautiful symphony of brotherhood.
With this faith, we will be able to work together, to pray together, to struggle together, to go to jail together, to stand up for freedom together, knowing that we will be free one day.
And this will be the day - this will be the day when all of God's children will be able to sing with new meaning:
My country 'tis of thee, sweet land of liberty, of thee I sing.
Land where my fathers died, land of the Pilgrim's pride.
From every mountainside, let freedom ring!
And if America is to be a great nation, this must become true.
And so let freedom ring from the prodigious hilltops of New Hampshire.
Let freedom ring from the mighty mountains of New York.
Let freedom ring from the heightening Alleghenies of Pennsylvania.
Let freedom ring from the snow-capped Rockies of Colorado.
Let freedom ring from the curvaceous slopes of California.
But not only that:
Let freedom ring from Stone Mountain of Georgia.
Let freedom ring from Lookout Mountain of Tennessee.
Let freedom ring from every hill and molehill of Mississippi.
From every mountainside, let freedom ring.
And when this happens, when we allow freedom ring, when we let it ring from every village and every hamlet, from every state and every city, we will be able to speed up that day when all of God's children, black men and white men, Jews and Gentiles, Protestants and Catholics, will be able to join hands and sing in the words of the old Negro spiritual:
Free at last!
Free at last!
Thank God Almighty, we are free at last!
At the airport bookstore, there are only about a dozen freestanding shelves of books.
It's Darwinian selection at its most brutal: only the most popular authors, the newest novels, and the most recognizable classics survive.
You won't find the lesser known works of Oscar Wilde or Voltaire or even Hemingway - there isn't space for them.
Jane Austen makes only the briefest appearance, and Edgar Allen Poe shows his face only at Halloween.
There are no collections of poetry beyond Dr. Seuss.
There is, however, a whole rack of self-help books.
Americans are obsessed with making ourselves better, smarter, thinner.
You can buy books to improve your vocabulary.
You can devour a stack of books that will teach you to work more efficiently, more ruthlessly, and claw your way to the top - and then you can read books on how to stop and smell the roses and enjoy your life more fully.
There are even books that will teach you how to organize your closets.
All of these things dance around the essential truth: we want to be happy.
We want to be loved.
We want to find meaning in our lives and feel that our contributions make a difference.
This, is How To Be Happy.
Eat more cookies.
Abstaining from a single cookie isn't going to make you look svelte and toned.
Go on, eat some cookies.
I recommend the double chocolate ones with chocolate chips inside.
Sing.
In your car.
In elevators.
At the mall, especially at Crate & Barrel and Pottery Barn.
In hospital corridors.
Before important client meetings.
When people give you that patronizing look, wink at'em.
Make popsicles.
Stay home on the weekend and disconnect your phone.
Bring a plastic straw to a fancy restaurant.
Make loud gurgling sounds when you get to the bottom as you attempt to drink every last molecule of diet Coke.
Order the stuff on the menu that you've never heard of - like Gkaeng Cheud Bplah Meuk Yad Sai(Stuffed Squid Soup with Napa Cabbage or Squash).
Talk to strangers.
Collect something weird that isn't expensive but is relatively hard-to-find.
Wear odd hats in public places.
Amass a jar of coins.
Bury them in your back yard.
Draw a treasure map and give it to a friend.
Walk to the park near your house.
Do some somersaults.
When was the last time you did a somersault, anyway?
Eat pickles out of the jar.
Build a Web site and write your own column.
Spend a day by yourself.
Leave your cell phone at home.
Wander the streets, muttering to yourself and occasionally disagreeing with what you've just muttered.
Buy a puppy.
Name it Charo.
Get your teeth capped.
Move to Hollywood.
Become a star. (
Isn't that what you've been dreaming about anyway?)
Wear thong panties under your habit (nuns only).
Throw a surprise birthday party for a friend.
Invite lots of people.
Make sure that your friend's actual birthday is nowhere near the date of the party.
Belch in public.
Then sigh contently.
Suntan naked on a public beach.
Adopt a European accent for the day to explain your complete lack of modesty.
Quit your worthless job and dedicate your life to the study of the Moroccan flute.
Fly a kite.
Stop wasting your life with the Moroccan flute and get a real job.
Volunteer at your library, or church, or your local soup kitchen, or Habitat for Humanity.
Wear clothes so ratty that you are often mistaken for one of the "needy. "
Join a bowling league.
Buy a large red bowling ball.
Name it "Gorbachev. "
Drive to the nearest national forest.
Hike a mile with a backpack full of cold fried chicken and biscuits.
Find a clearing where you will not meet a single human and have a picnic.
Stare at the clouds for a full afternoon and dream.
Think about the things you love to do.
Now go and do those things more often.
Meet someone, fall in love, live happily ever after.
In the curious custom of this venerable institution, I find myself standing before you expected to impart words of lasting wisdom.
Here I am in a pulpit, dressed like a Puritan minister - an apparition that would have horrified many of my distinguished forebears and perhaps rededicated some of them to the extirpation of witches.
But here I am and there you are and it is the moment of and for Veritas.
You have been undergraduates for four years.
I have been president for not quite one.
You have known three presidents; I one senior class.
Where then lies the voice of experience?
Maybe you should be offering the wisdom.
Perhaps our roles could be reversed and I could, in Harvard Law School style, do cold calls for the next hour or so.
We all do seem to have made it to this point - more or less in one piece.
Though I recently learned that we have not provided you with dinner since May 22.
I know we need to wean you from Harvard in a figurative sense.
I never knew we took it quite so literally.
But let's return to that notion of cold calls for a moment.
Let's imagine this were a baccalaureate service in the form of Q & A, and you were asking the questions. "
What is the meaning of life, President Faust?
What were these four years at Harvard for?
President Faust, you must have learned something since you graduated from college exactly 40 years ago? " (
Forty years.
I'll say it out loud since every detail of my life - and certainly the year of my Bryn Mawr degree - now seems to be publicly available.)
In a way, you have been engaging me in this Q & A for the past year.
On just these questions, although you have phrased them a bit more narrowly.
And I have been trying to figure out how I might answer and, perhaps more intriguingly, why you were asking.
...
As I have listened to you talk about the choices ahead of you, I have heard you articulate your worries about the relationship of success and happiness - perhaps, more accurately, how to define success so that it yields and encompasses real happiness, not just money and prestige.
The most remunerative choice, you fear, may not be the most meaningful and the most satisfying.
But you wonder how you would ever survive as an artist or an actor or a public servant or a high school teacher?
How would you ever figure out a path by which to make your way into journalism?
Would you ever find a job as an English professor after you finished who knows how many years of graduate school and dissertation writing?
The answer is: you won't know till you try.
But if you don't try to do what you love - whether it is painting or biology or finance; if you don't pursue what you think will be most meaningful, you will regret it.
Life is long.
There is always time for Plan B. But don't begin with it.
I think of this as my parking space theory of career choice, and I have been sharing it with students for decades.
Don't park 20 blocks from your destination because you think you'll never find a space.
Go where you want to be and then circle back to where you have to be.
You may love investment banking or finance or consulting.
It might be just right for you.
Or, you might be like the senior I met at lunch at Kirkland who had just returned from an interview on the West Coast with a prestigious consulting firm. "
Why am I doing this? "
she asked. "
I hate flying, I hate hotels, I won't like this job. "
Find work you love.
It is hard to be happy if you spend more than half your waking hours doing something you don't like.
But what is ultimately most important here is that you are asking the question - not just of me but of yourselves.
You are choosing roads and at the same time challenging your own choices.
You have a notion of what you want your life to be and you are not sure the road you are taking is going to get you there.
This is the best news.
And it is also, I hope, to some degree, our fault.
Noticing your life, reflecting upon it, considering how you can live it well, wondering how you can do good: these are perhaps the most valuable things that a liberal arts education has equipped you to do.
A liberal education demands that you live self-consciously.
It prepares you to seek and define the meaning inherent in all you do.
It has made you an analyst and critic of yourself, a person in this way supremely equipped to take charge of your life and how it unfolds.
It is in this sense that the liberal arts are liberal - as in liberate - to free.
They empower you with the possibility of exercising agency, of discovering meaning, of making choices.
The surest way to have a meaningful, happy life is to commit yourself to striving for it.
Don't settle.
Be prepared to change routes.
Remember the impossible expectations we have of you, and even as you recognize they are impossible, remember how important they are as a lodestar guiding you toward something that matters to you and to the world.
The meaning of your life is for you to make.
I can't wait to see how you all turn out.
Do come back, from time to time, and let us know.
I was convinced that the only thing I wanted to do, ever, was to write novels.
However, my parents, both of whom came from impoverished backgrounds and neither of whom had been to college, took the view that my overactive imagination was an amusing personal quirk that could never pay a mortgage, or secure a pension.
They had hoped that I would take a vocational degree; I wanted to study English Literature.
A compromise was reached that in retrospect satisfied nobody, and I went up to study Modern Languages.
Hardly had my parents' car rounded the corner at the end of the road than I ditched German and scuttled off down the Classics corridor.
I cannot remember telling my parents that I was studying Classics; they might well have found out for the first time on graduation day.
Of all subjects on this planet, I think they would have been hard put to name one less useful than Greek mythology when it came to securing the keys to an executive bathroom.
I would like to make it clear, in parenthesis, that I do not blame my parents for their point of view. ...
I cannot criticise my parents for hoping that I would never experience poverty.
They had been poor themselves, and I have since been poor, and I quite agree with them that it is not an ennobling experience.
Poverty entails fear, and stress, and sometimes depression; it means a thousand petty humiliations and hardships.
Climbing out of poverty by your own efforts, that is indeed something on which to pride yourself, but poverty itself is romanticised only by fools.
A mere seven years after my graduation day, I had failed on an epic scale.
An exceptionally short-lived marriage had imploded, and I was jobless, a lone parent, and as poor as it is possible to be in modern Britain, without being homeless.
The fears my parents had had for me, and that I had had for myself, had both come to pass, and by every usual standard, I was the biggest failure I knew.
That period of my life was a dark one.
I had no idea how far the tunnel extended, and for a long time, any light at the end of it was a hope rather than a reality.
So why do I talk about the benefits of failure?
Simply because failure meant a stripping away of the inessential.
I stopped pretending to myself that I was anything other than what I was, and began to direct all my energy into finishing the only work that mattered to me.
Had I really succeeded at anything else, I might never have found the determination to succeed in the one arena I believed I truly belonged.
I was set free, because my greatest fear had already been realised, and I was still alive, and I still had a daughter whom I adored, and I had an old typewriter and a big idea.
And so rock bottom became the solid foundation on which I rebuilt my life.
Failure gave me an inner security that I had never attained by passing examinations.
Failure taught me things about myself that I could have learned no other way.
I discovered that I had a strong will, and more discipline than I had suspected; I also found out that I had friends whose value was truly above rubies.
You will never truly know yourself, or the strength of your relationships, until both have been tested by adversity.
Such knowledge is a true gift, for all that it is painfully won, and it has been worth more to me than any qualification I ever earned.
...
The fact that you are graduating from Harvard suggests that you are not very well-acquainted with failure.
You might be driven by a fear of failure quite as much as a desire for success.
Indeed, your conception of failure might not be too far from the average person's idea of success, so high have you already flown academically.
But how much more are you, Harvard graduates of 2008, likely to touch other people's lives?
Your intelligence, your capacity for hard work, the education you have earned and received, give you unique status, and unique responsibilities … That is your privilege, and your burden.
If you choose to use your status and influence to raise your voice on behalf of those who have no voice; if you choose to identify not only with the powerful, but with the powerless; if you retain the ability to imagine yourself into the lives of those who do not have your advantages, then it will not only be your proud families who celebrate your existence, but thousands and millions of people whose reality you have helped transform for the better.
We do not need magic to change the world, we carry all the power we need inside ourselves already: we have the power to imagine better.
Several years ago, I received a post card from a friend in Jackson Hole, Wyo.,
who wrote, "I am skiing with abandon! "
I wondered what he meant, for when I ski it is always with trepidation.
I believe he meant he was skiing skillfully, joyfully, peacefully and confidently.
Although I have no hopes of ever skiing that way, I do dream of living with abandon.
I believe that men and women through the ages who have led successful lives have captured these five secrets of living life to the fullest.
Have a self-respect This means having a deep sense of responsibility for your thoughts and actions.
It means keeping your word, and being faithful to self, family and work.
It means believing in what you do and working hard.
It means setting your own internal standards, and not comparing yourself to others.
It's not a question of being better than someone else; respect and integrity demand that you be better than you thought you could be.
Winston Churchill exemplified integrity and respect in the face of opposition.
During his last year in office, he attended an official ceremony.
Several rows behind him two gentlemen began whispering. "
That's Winston Churchill. " "
They say he is getting senile." "
They say he should step aside and leave the running of the nation to more dynamic and capable men. "
When the ceremony was over, Churchill turned to the men and said, "Gentlemen, they also say he is deaf! "
Churchill knew that one secret to a self you can respect is to choose a course of action based on what is right, not expedient, and not waver from it when criticized.
Commit yourself to others Believe in others, and take time to nurture their dreams.
A wise man said, "If you want one year's prosperity, grow grain.
But if you want ten years' prosperity, grow men and women. "
You can build into the lives of your family, friends and colleagues by providing nutrients of gratitude and encouragement, and by investing your time and energy in their aspirations.
If a tree is given minimal nourishment, it will live, but it will not grow.
But if nourishment is given over and beyond what is needed for life, the tree will live and grow upward, producing fruit.
Turn disappointments into strengths Individuals who live with abandon have discovered that personal trials make them more sensitive and loving, while building endurance and character.
They have learned that achievements worth remembering are stained with the blood of diligence and etched with the scars of disappointment.
The pages of history are filled with the heroic stories of undaunted men and women who triumphed over disabilities and adversities to demonstrate victorious spirits.
Raise him in abject poverty, and you have an Abraham Lincoln.
Make her blind and deaf, and you have a Helen Keller.
Enjoy life's process, not just life's rewards We live in a goal-oriented society that wants problems resolved now.
We want three-minute oatmeal, one-hour dry cleaning, and instant success.
But to live with abandon, we must live one day at a time, savoring the little victories, realizing that life is an endless journey in self-discovery and personal fulfillment.
It means taking time to hug your kids, kiss your spouse and let the other fellow ahead of you on the freeway.
" I was one of those people who never go anywhere without a thermometer, hot water bottle, raincoat and parachute," wrote author Don Herold. "
If I had my life to live over, I would go barefoot earlier in spring.
I would ride more merry-go-rounds.
I would take more chances, and I would eat more ice-cream. "
Become involved in something bigger than yourself I do not believe you will live happily if you set out to live life for yourself alone.
Choose a cause bigger than yourself and work at it in a spirit of excellence.
It will become a part of you as you see your goals through to the end.
Measure success not by what you've done, but what you could do.
On communication and mutual respect in marriage Marriage requires the giving and keeping of confidences, the sharing of thoughts and feelings, unfailing respect and understanding, and a frank and gentle communication.
On priorities No other success can compensate for failure in the home.
Both father and mother have a sacred duty to rear their children in love and righteousness.
They share these duties as equal partners.
Careers, investments, sports, television, Web surfing or other activities shouldn't be allowed to displace the family in importance for either husband or wife.
On division of labor Ordinarily, fathers are responsible for providing the necessities of life, and mothers are primarily responsible for nurturing their children.
Wherever possible, mothers of young children should provide the critical nurturing needed to optimize the children's intellectual, emotional and spiritual development.
Husbands should share household chores with their wives and see that the children do likewise.
They should arrange for their spouses to have adequate time to pursue personal interests.
On teaching values to children It is in the laboratory of the home that children are taught (or not) about tolerance and respect for others; loyalty to family, friends and institutions; the rights and responsibilities of citizenship; obedience to law and dispute resolution; health and nutrition; charity and service; the thrill of learning; the sanctity of sex; and the importance of hard work.
On continuing courtship in marriage Psychologist Erich Fromm defined love as "the active concern for the life and growth of that which is loved".
Implement that concern by taking time each day to communicate with your beloved.
Spend time together each week, away from the house, talking, planning, expressing, sharing.
On divorce Marriage is more than a casual commitment of convenience.
In a day when one-third of all marriages end in divorce, we need reminding: Marriage is for "adults only", not necessarily of years, but maturity of attitude, the maturity to know that there aren't any perfect people, that nothing is ever altogether as anticipated, that the years change us and others.
Marriage requires the maturity to adjust, to forgive, to understand, to be forgiven.
On forgiving In marriage and family life we often fall short of Jesus' injunction to be perfect.
To forgive and forget offenses enables imperfect people to grow and improve and exemplify unconditional love.
Years ago, when I started looking for my first job, wise advisers urged, "Betty be enthusiastic!
Enthusiasm will take you further than any amount of experience. "
How right they were.
Enthusiastic people can turn a boring drive into an adventure, extra work into opportunity and strangers into friends.
" Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm. "
Wrote Ralph Waldo Emerson.
It is the paste that helps you hang in there when the going gets tough.
It is the inner voice that whispers, "I can do it!"
when others shout "No, you can't. "
It took years and years for the early work of Barbara Mc-Clintock, a geneticist who won the 1983 Nobel Prize in medicine, to be generally accepted.
Yet she didn't let up on her experiments.
Work was such a deep pleasure for her that she never thought of stopping.
We are all born with wide-eyed, enthusiastic wonder as anyone knows who has ever seen an infant's delight at the jingle of keys or the scurrying of a beetle.
It is this childlike wonder that gives enthusiastic people such a youthful air, whatever their age.
At 90, cellist Pablo Casals would start his day by playing Bach.
As the music flowed through his fingers, his stooped shoulders would straighten and joy would reappear in his eyes.
Music, for Casals, was an elixir that made life a never ending adventure.
As author and poet Samuel Ullman once wrote, "Years wrinkle the skin, but to give up enthusiasm wrinkles the soul. "
How do you rediscover the enthusiasm of your childhood?
The answer, I believe, lies in the word itself. "
Enthusiasm" comes from the Greek language and means "God within".
And what is God within is but an abiding sense of love - proper love of self (selfacceptance) and, from that, love of others.
Enthusiastic people also love what they do, regardless of money or title or power.
If we cannot do what we love as a fulltime career, we can do it as a part-time avocation.
Like the head of a state who paints, the nun who runs marathons, the executive who handcrafts furniture.
Elizabeth Layton of Wellsville, Kan, was 68 before she began to draw.
This activity ended bouts of depression that had plagued her for at least 30 years, and the quality of her work led one critic to say, "I am tempted to call Layton a genius. "
Elizabeth has rediscovered her enthusiasm.
We can't afford to waste tears on "might-havebeens".
We need to turn the tears into sweat as we go after "what-can-be".
We need to live each moment wholeheartedly, with all our senses - finding pleasure in the fragrance of a back-yard garden, the crayoned picture of a sixyear-old, the enchanting beauty of a rainbow.
It is such enthusiastic love of life that puts a sparkle in our eyes, a lilt in our steps and smooths the wrinkles from our souls.
I wish that I could tell every person that I meet that he or she is a beautiful person - and have them believe it.
I wish I could look them in the eyes and tell them of their beauty and have them accept the words for what they truly are - the truth, plain and simple.
You and I both know that most people will deny their beauty, expressing what they feel is modesty or humility.
It's easier for us to be told that we're talented or intelligent - our own beauty is something that we don't want to face.
You could help me to convince people of their innate beauty.
You could agree with me in an effort to reinforce the message.
You could give a few specifics to illustrate just what we're talking about when we say the person is beautiful.
You could reassure the person that I'm not saying it to flatter or to try to win the person over or get something out of the person, but just trying to express in words the beauty I see when I look into that person's eyes and see the human being there, the person who gets happy and hurt and who laughs and who cries.
You can help me by reminding the person that beauty isn't about comparing ourselves with others, but about the part of us that shines when we love others and love life.
It's not all physical and it's not all spiritual, but a tender combination of all that we are.
If you have ever been discouraged because of failure, please read on.
For often, achieving what you set out to do is not the important thing.
Let me explain.
Two brothers decided to dig a deep hole behind their house.
As they were working, a couple of older boys stopped by to watch.
" What are you doing? "
asked one of the visitors.
" We plan to dig a hole all the way through the earth! "
one of the brothers volunteered excitedly.
The older boys began to laugh, telling the younger ones that digging a hole all the way through the earth was impossible.
After a long silence, one of the diggers picked up a jar full of spiders, worms and a wide assortment of insects.
He removed the lid and showed the wonderful contents to the scoffing visitors.
Then he said quietly and confidently, "Even if we don't dig all the way through the earth, look what we found along the way! "
Their goal was far too ambitious, but it did cause them to dig.
And that is what a goal is for - to cause us to move in the direction we have chosen; in other words, to set us to digging!
But not every goal will be fully achieved.
Not every job will end successfully.
Not every relationship will endure.
Not every hope will come to pass.
Not every love will last.
Not every endeavor will be completed.
Not every dream will be realized.
But when you fall short of your aim, perhaps you can say, "Yes, but look at what I found along the way!
Look at the wonderful things which have come into my life because I tried to do something! "
It is in the digging that life is lived.
And I believe it is joy in the journey, in the end, that truly matters.
One day a teacher asked her students to list the names of the other students in the room on two sheets of paper, leaving a space between each name.
Then she told them to think of the nicest thing about each of their classmates and write it down.
It took the students a whole period to finish their assignment, and as the students left the room, each one handed in the paper.
That Saturday, the teacher wrote down the name of each student on a separate sheet of paper, and listed what everyone else had said about that individual.
On Monday she gave each student his or her list.
Before long the entire class was smiling. "
Really? "
she heard whispered. "
I never knew that I meant anything to anyone!"
and, "I didn't know others liked me so much. "
were most of the comments.
No one ever mentioned those papers in class again.
She never knew if they discussed them after class or with their parents, but it didn't matter.
The exercise had accomplished its purpose.
The students were happy with themselves and one another.
That group of students moved on.
Last year one of the students was killed in a battle and his teacher attended the funeral of that student.
The church was packed with his friends.
One by one those who loved him took a last walk by the coffin.
The teacher was the last one to walk past the coffin.
After the funeral, most of Victor's former classmates went together to a luncheon.
Victor's mother and father were there, obviously waiting to speak with his teacher.
" We want to show you something," his father said, taking a wallet out of his pocket. "
They found this on Victor when he was killed.
We thought you might recognize it. "
Opening the billfold, he carefully removed two worn pieces of notebook paper that had obviously been folded and refolded many times.
The teacher knew without looking that the papers were the ones on which she had listed all the good things each of Victor's classmates had said about him.
"Thank you so much for doing that," Victor's mother said. "
As you can see, Victor treasured it. "
All of Victor's former classmates started to gather around.
Luke smiled rather sheepishly and said, "I still have my list.
It's in the top drawer of my desk at home. "
Luke's wife said, "Luke asked me to put his in our wedding album. "
" I have mine too," Ada said. "
It's in my diary. "
Then Arlene, another classmate, took out her wallet and showed her worn and frazzled list to the group. "
I carry this with me at all times," Arlene said and without batting an eyelash, she continued, "I think we all saved our lists. "
The teacher finally sat down and cried.
She cried for Victor and for all his friends who would never see him again.
The density of people in society is so thick that we forget that life will end one day.
And we don't know when that one day will be.
Please, tell the people you love and care for, that they are special and important.
Tell them, before it is too late.
Remember, you reap what you sow.
What you put into the lives of others comes back into your own.
May your day be blessed and be as special as you are.
The Man was very sad.
He knew that the Cat's days were numbered.
The doctor had said that there wasn't anything more that could be done, that he should take the Cat home and make him as comfortable as possible.
The Man stroked the Cat on his lap and sighed.
The Cat opened his eyes, purred and looked up at the Man.
A tear rolled down the Man's cheek and landed on the Cat's forehead.
The Cat gave him a slightly annoyed look.
" Why do you cry, Man? "
the Cat asked. "
Because you can't bear the thought of losing me?
Because you think you can never replace me? "
The Man nodded, "Yes. "
" And where do you think I'll be when I leave you? "
the Cat asked.
The Man shrugged helplessly. "
Close your eyes, Man," the Cat said.
The Man gave him a questioning look, but did as he was told.
" What color are my eyes and fur? "
the Cat asked. "
Your eyes are gold and your fur is a rich, warm brown," the Man replied.
" And where is it that you most often see me?"
asked the Cat. "
I see you...on the kitchen windowsill watching the birds...on my favorite chair...on my desk lying on the papers I need...on the pillow next to my head at night." "
Then, whenever you wish to see me, all you must do is close your eyes," said the Cat.
"Pick up that piece of string from the floor - there, my 'toy.' "
The Man opened his eyes, then reached over and picked up the string.
It was about two feet long and the Cat had been able to entertain himself for hours with it. "
Now take each end of the string in one hand," the Cat ordered.
The Man did so.
" The end in your left hand is my birth and the end in your right hand is my death.
Now bring the two ends together," the Cat said.
The Man complied.
" You have made a continuous circle," said the Cat. "
Does any point along the string appear to be different, worse or better than any other part of the string? "
The Man inspected the string and then shook his head, "No. "
" Close your eyes again," the Cat said. "
Now lick your hand. "
The Man widened his eyes in surprise.
" Just do it," the Cat said. "
Lick your hand, think of me in all my familiar places, think about all the pieces of string. "
The Man felt foolish, licking his hand, but he did as he was told.
He discovered what a cat must know, that licking a paw is very calming and allows one to think more clearly.
He continued licking and the corners of his mouth turned upward into the first smile he had shown in days.
He waited for the Cat to tell him to stop, and when he didn't, he opened his eyes.
The Cat's eyes were closed.
The Man stroked the warm, brown fur, but the Cat was gone.
The Man shut his eyes hard as the tears poured down his face.
He saw the Cat on the windowsill, then in his bed, then lying across his important papers.
He saw him on the pillow next to his head, saw his bright gold eyes and darkest brown on his nose and ears.
He opened his eyes and through his tears looked over at the circle of string he still held clutched in his hand.
One day, not long after, there was a new Cat on his lap.
She was a lovely calico and white...very different from his earlier beloved Cat and very much the same.
When you are old and grey and full of sleep,
And nodding by the fire, take down this book,
And slowly read, and dream of the soft look
Your eyes had once, and of their shadows deep;
How many loved your moments of glad grace,
And loved your beauty with love false or true,
But one man loved the pilgrim soul in you,
And loved the sorrows of your changing face;
And bending down beside the glowing bars,
Murmur, a little sadly, how Love fled
And paced upon the mountains overhead
And hid his face amid a crowd of stars.
In a yellow pond there are white ducks swimming.
Only a little taller than people, sorghums are still green.
Where should I put in this pounding heart,
A narrow path in the field, this sadness in August.
Rain washed the sky clean last night, sun shines
On hills and leaves some shadows
Sheep follow the shepherd into the village,
And shading a well, a big tree looks like a heart.
No one ever spoke of August, summer is over
And fall isn't here.
I look onto a farmland
And then at the squashes over the earth wall,
I just don't understand how life and dream connect.
Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book, called True Stories from Nature, about the primeval forest.
It was a picture of a boa constrictor in the act of swallowing an animal.
Here is a copy of the drawing.
In the book it said, "Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing it.
After that they are not able to move, and they sleep through the six months that they need for digestion. "
I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle.
And after some work with a colored pencil I succeeded in making my first drawing.
My Drawing Number One.
It looked like this:
I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups, and asked them whether the drawing frightened them.
But they answered, "Frighten?
Why should any one be frightened by a hat? "
My drawing was not a picture of a hat.
It was a picture of a boa constrictor digesting an elephant.
But since the grown-ups were not able to understand it, I made another drawing, I drew the inside of the boa constrictor, so that the grown-ups could see it clearly.
They always need to have things explained.
My Drawing Number Two looked like this:
The grown-ups' response, this time, was to advise me to lay aside my drawings of boa constrictors, whether from the inside or the outside, and devote myself instead to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar.
That is why, at the age of six, I gave up what might have been a magnificent career as a painter.
I had been disheartened by the failure of my Drawing Number One and my Drawing Number Two.
Grown-ups never understand anything by themselves, and it is tiresome for children to be always and forever explaining things to them.
So then I chose another profession, and learned to pilot airplanes.
I have flown a little over all parts of the world; and it is true that geography has been very useful to me.
At a glance I can distinguish China from Arizona.
If one gets lost in the night, such knowledge is valuable.
In the course of this life I have had a great many encounters with a great many people who have been concerned with matters of consequence.
I have lived a great deal among grown-ups.
I have seen them intimately, close at hand.
And that hasn't much improved my opinion of them.
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear-sighted, I tried the experiment of showing him my Drawing Number One, which I have always kept.
I would try to find out, so, if this was a person of true understanding.
But, whoever it was, he, or she, would always say: "That is a hat. "
Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors, or primeval forests, or stars.
I would bring myself down to his level.
I would talk to him about bridge, and golf, and politics, and neckties.
And the grown-up would be greatly pleased to have met such a sensible man.
My grandfather had a small farm where he raised beef and some grain for feed.
He also worked diligently as a factory laborer and country pastor.
He was a good neighbor and well respected for honoring his word.
When harvesttime came, he'd piece together his old one-row corn picker and oil it up for the season.
He pulled it behind a little Ford tractor with a wagon hooked on the back.
It was a noisy contraption unlike the modern machines you see these days devouring the golden armies of grain in wide gulps.
His whole operation was like that.
Basic.
In fact, his life was like that, too.
He worked hard, helped others and you could count on him to keep his promises.
That's what made it so hard one autumn when difficult circumstances closed in on him.
He had promised to harvest a few ribbons of corn that wound around the hills on a friend's farm, but after harvesting his own corn, grandpa's little corn picker coughed, sputtered and quit.
It would be out of commission until a particular part could be ordered, but that would take far too long to help this year.
Then the odds of being able to help out his neighbor got even worse; the factory where grandpa worked began to require overtime.
In order to keep his job there he had to leave the farm before dawn and didn't get home until well after sunset.
One autumn night, while harvesttime was running out, he and his wife sat at the kitchen table sipping bitter black coffee trying to figure a way out of their dilemma.
" There's nothing you can do," said my grandma, "You'll just have to tell him that you can't help with the corn this year. "
" Well that just doesn't sit well with me," said my grandpa, "My friend is depending on me.
I can't exactly let my neighbor's harvest rot in the field, can I? "
" If you don't have the equipment, you just can't do it," she said.
" Well, I could do it the way we used to do it.
I could harvest it by hand," he said.
" When do you think you'd have time to do it? "
she asked, "With the overtime you've been working you'd be up all night... besides it'd be too dark. "
" I know one night that I could do it!"
he said running to the bookshelf.
He grabbed the Farmer's Almanac and started flipping through the pages until he found what he was looking for.
"Aha!
There's still one more full moon in October. "
As it happened, the harvest moon had yet to pass.
They say it's called the harvest moon because it gives farmers more light and more time to collect their crops. "
If the Lord gives us clear weather, I think I can do it," he said.
And so a few days later, after a long shift at the factory, my grandpa made his way to the field where my grandma met him in the truck with dinner and a steaming thermos of strong, black coffee.
The weather was cold but clear, and the moon was brilliant.
He worked through the night to keep his word.
I know this story well, because I've spent hours on that old tractor's fender talking with my grandpa.
We've even suffered through some of that same bitter coffee together.
I'm proud to say that my parents named me after him.
Sometimes, when I'm tempted to cut corners or to put off responsibilities, I think of my grandfather with his scythe cutting wide arcs of corn in the light of the harvest moon.
I hear the ears of corn hit the floor of the wagon and the music of geese crossing the cold October sky.
The chill autumn morning darkness envelopes my mind and I see my grandpa, his work finally done, crawling into the seat of the old tractor and making his way home.
Behind him in the pale moonlight, row after row of corn shocks stand at attention in respect for a man who keeps his word.
I stepped out of my vehicle drive to meet my client and his wife.
He was strong and solidly built.
He looked like a model for an outdoor catalogue.
The fishing vest was stiff with newness; all of the correct hardware, shiny and untested, hung from his chest, like tools in a toolshed.
The felt on his wading boots was as white as snow.
A handcrafted net swung on his back.
The rod had never gotten wet, much less caught a fish, and the line was shiny from lack of use.
The reel was on backward.
Typical beginner, I thought.
I reached out to shake his hand.
A firm grip grabbed back.
His wife, an attractive woman brimming with confidence, took a photo of us, then waved goodbye with an arm heavily weighted with turquoise bracelets.
First I turned his reel around.
He smiled and shrugged.
Then we began his casting lesson on the lawn behind the main lodge.
To my surprise, he was one of those rare people who connect with a fly rod almost immediately.
It just looked right from the beginning, and he was charmed by the way the line seemed to magically flow above his silhouette on the lawn.
" I could just stand here all day and cast," he said, smiling.
We did not have to travel far to the water, since a perfectly sweet little creek ran along the last six miles of the rutted dirt road I had traveled that morning.
The warmth of the sun raised the water temperature enough to awaken the rainbow and cutthroat trout that slumbered, and the caddis flies were dancing their erratic dance, here and there, over the water.
Even in hip waders we were overdressed for the ankle-deep creek, but we stepped in, waded out to the middle and faced upstream.
My client cast, and I pointed to the place the fly should land.
" Oh, hey!
Look at that," he said when the first fish struck.
He was truly awed.
The second time a trout struck, his shouts of surprise and joy rang up and down the creek, and we happily reeled in a sparkling, eight-inch wild rainbow.
"Isn't that beautiful?"
he said softly, and every trout after that was beautiful, incredible, amazing, fantastic.
A little brook trout took the fly, and I held it so my client could see the blue rings around the bright-orange spots.
" That's the prettiest thing I've ever seen," he said with sincerity.
To be with someone who was able to treasure the moment the way he did made me feel like I was exploring fly-fishing for the first time.
I showed him how to keep his fly from dragging, how to fish the deeper pools.
He was absorbed by the whys and the hows and the execution.
And the fish, whether six inches or ten, were praised like precious stones.
In the late afternoon, about the time the skin begins to feel sore from a fresh sunburn, my client stopped fishing.
His shoulders dropped, and he paused to look at the water, the trees and, finally, at me.
" I have to tell you something," he said. "
This has been one of the best days of my life.
The reason I'm telling you is, I wasn't supposed to be here right now.
I've been very sick, and the doctors didn't think I was going to make it.
I wasn't sure I was going to make it, but I've been well since last fall, and everything is fine now.
My wife gave me this equipment because I've always wanted to fly-fish, and this trip is kind of a celebration for our family.
This really has been one of the best days of my life. "
I could not speak.
I looked into his eyes and nodded.
He smiled at me and cast again.
We left the creek only after hearing the triangle ringing for dinner in the distance.
Down the dirt road my vehicle bounced over ruts and rocks as I followed the creek that had given us "fantastic," "beautiful," "amazing" trout.
The next day there would be a new fisherman to meet.
And I would not let stiff, expensive clothes or a backward-mounted reel deceive me into thinking he had nothing to teach me.
I keep a two-dollar bill in my wallet that was given to me by my mother when I was six years old.
I am not superstitious but the bill goes with me wherever I go.
My mother gave it to me so that luck would follow me everywhere.
She looked at me and said, "I want you to carry this two-dollar bill for extra good luck. "
" Thanks mom," I replied, "I will keep it close to me always. "
Every morning I would get dressed and my two-dollar bill went into my pocket.
My mother passed away when I was 17 years old and I remembered taking out my two-dollar bill.
I held it in my hand for the longest time and knew that she would be watching over me the rest of my life.
Each time I felt I had a crisis on my hands, I would reach for my two-dollar bill and set it on the table.
I would stare at it for several hours and could always come up with a solution.
When I applied for my first job, I was thirty years old and very shy.
The thought of being interviewed for a job was scary but I had to work.
On my first interview, as I sat in the waiting room, I noticed there were five women ahead of me.
All of the women were younger and very well-dressed.
One of them was impeccable in her blue striped suit with matching purse and shoes.
I knew I was up against women better qualified by looking at the length of their resumes.
Ms Johnson, the office manager, summoned me into her office.
" What makes you feel you are qualified for this job? "
she asked.
" I really need this job and there is nothing I cannot do," I responded.
She asked me a series of questions and the interview was over.
As I exited her office, I turned around and said, "Ms Johnson, I know that I am not qualified like your other applicants, but please give me a chance.
I learn quickly and can be a very productive member of your team. "
I thanked her and went home exhausted.
Oh well, I thought, tomorrow would be another day.
That evening as I was getting ready for bed, I received a phone call from Ms Johnson.
" Sara," she said, "you were not the most qualified applicant, but you have so much confidence in yourself that we decided to give you a chance to prove yourself. "
I screamed out loud, was jumping all over the room in disbelief.
I could hear Ms Johnson laughing in the background and suddenly I realized that Ms Johnson was still on the line.
"Thank you, Ms Johnson, you will not regret this decision," I said and hung up the phone.
I got my wallet and took out my two-dollar bill.
" Thanks mom, I am going to make it," I said out loud so my mother could hear me.
At that instant, I remembered the time she pulled all of us into the living room and said, "You are all brilliant in my mind, but if you fail once don't give up.
Don't fear failure.
It is a way of getting us to try harder.
You will succeed, I promise. "
I still think of mom every day and still keep my two-dollar bill in my wallet.
At a family reunion years later, I found out that my brothers and sisters all had a two-dollar bill in their wallet.
We all laughed and talked about how special this gift from mom had been to each and everyone of us.
It had reinforced the confidence mom had instilled in us.
Dear Ben,
You're only three years old, and at this point in your life you can't read, much less understand what I'm going to try to tell you in this letter.
But I've been thinking a lot about the life that you have ahead of you, about my life so far as I reflect on what I've learned, and about my role as a dad in trying to prepare you for the trials that you will face in the coming years.
You won't be able to understand this letter today, but someday, when you're ready, I hope you will find some wisdom and value in what I share with you.
You are young, and life has yet to take its toll on you, to throw disappointments and heartaches and loneliness and struggles and pain into your path.
You have not been worn down yet by long hours of thankless work, by the slings and arrows of everyday life.
For this, be thankful.
You are at a wonderful stage of life.
You have many wonderful stages of life still to come, but they are not without their costs and perils.
I hope to help you along your path by sharing some of the best of what I've learned.
As with any advice, take it with a grain of salt.
What works for me might not work for you.
Life Can Be Cruel
There will be people in your life who won't be very nice.
They'll tease you because you're different, or for no good reason.
They might try to bully you or hurt you.
There's not much you can do about these people except to learn to deal with them, and learn to choose friends who are kind to you, who actually care about you, who make you feel good about yourself.
When you find friends like this, hold on to them, treasure them, spend time with them, be kind to them, love them.
There will be times when you are met with disappointment instead of success.
Life won't always turn out the way you want.
This is just another thing you'll have to learn to deal with.
But instead of letting these things get you down, push on.
Accept disappointment and learn to persevere, to pursue your dreams despite pitfalls.
Learn to turn negatives into positives, and you'll do much better in life.
You will also face heartbreak and abandonment by those you love.
I hope you don't have to face this too much, but it happens.
Again, not much you can do but to heal, and to move on with your life.
Let these pains become stepping stones to better things in life, and learn to use them to make you stronger.
But Be Open to Life Anyway
Yes, you'll find cruelty and suffering in your journey through life...but don't let that close you to new things.
Don't retreat from life, don't hide or wall yourself off.
Be open to new things, new experiences, new people.
You might get your heart broken 10 times, but find the most wonderful woman the 11th time.
If you shut yourself off from love, you'll miss out on that woman, and the happiest times of your life.
You might get teased and bullied and hurt by people you meet...and then after meeting dozens of jerks, find a true friend.
If you close yourself off to new people, and don't open your heart to them, you'll avoid pain...but also lose out on meeting some incredible people, who will be there during the toughest times of your life and create some of the best times of your life.
You will fail many times but if you allow that to stop you from trying, you will miss out on the amazing feeling of success once you reach new heights with your accomplishments.
Failure is a stepping stone to success.
Life Isn't a Competition
You will meet many people who will try to outdo you, in school, in college, at work.
They'll try to have nicer cars, bigger houses, nicer clothes, cooler gadgets.
To them, life is a competition - they have to do better than their peers to be happy.
Here's a secret: life isn't a competition.
It's a journey.
If you spend that journey always trying to impress others, to outdo others, you're wasting your journey.
Instead, learn to enjoy the journey.
Make it a journey of happiness, of constant learning, of continual improvement, of love.
Don't worry about having a nicer car or house or anything material, or even a better-paying job.
None of that matters a whit, and none of it will make you happier.
You'll acquire these things and then only want more.
Instead, learn to be satisfied with having enough - and then use the time you would have wasted trying to earn money to buy those things...use that time doing things you love.
Find your passion, and pursue it doggedly.
Don't settle for a job that pays the bills.
Life is too short to waste on a job you hate.
Love Should Be Your Rule
If there's a single word you should live your life by, it should be this: Love.
It might sound corny, I know...but trust me, there's no better rule in life.
Some would live by the rule of success.
Their lives will be stressful, unhappy and shallow.
Others would live by the rule of selfishness - putting their needs above those of others.
They will live lonely lives, and will also be unhappy.
Still others will live by the rule of righteousness - trying to show the right path, and admonishing anyone who doesn't live by that path.
They are concerned with others, but in a negative way, and in the end will only have their own righteousness to live with, and that's a horrible companion.
Live your life by the rule of love.
Love your spouse, your children, your parents, your friends, with all of your heart.
Give to them what they need, and show them not cruelty nor disapproval nor coldness nor disappointment, but only love.
Open your soul to them.
Love not only your loved ones, but your neighbors...your coworkers...strangers...your brothers and sisters in humanity.
Offer anyone you meet a smile, a kind word, a kind gesture, a helping hand.
Love not only neighbors and strangers...but your enemy.
The person who is cruelest to you, who has been unkind to you...love him.
He is a tortured soul, and most in need of your love.
And most of all, love yourself.
While others may criticize you, learn not to be so hard on yourself, to think that you're ugly or dumb or unworthy of love...but to think instead that you are a wonderful human being, worthy of happiness and love...and learn to love yourself for who you are.
Finally, know that I love you and always will.
You are starting out on a weird, scary, daunting, but ultimately incredibly wonderful journey, and I will be there for you when I can.
Godspeed.
Love,
Your Dad
World travel is cheap and easy.
In fact, with a little practice and effort, you can travel the world for free.
1．Embrace the Simple Joy of Travel
Travel frees you from the grind of daily routine.
You will explore new places, meet new people, try new foods and learn things about the world - and yourself - that you never imagined were possible.
The joy of new experience is the most wonderful thing about travel - and new experiences are free.
Walk the streets of a city.
Stop and chat with a local.
People watch in a public park.
Climb to the top of a hill and watch the sun set over the ocean.
2．Keep Your Needs To a Minimum
People need fresh air, healthy food, clean water, exercise, creative stimulation, companionship, self-esteem and a safe place to sleep.
All of these things are simple to obtain.
Most of them are free.
For fresh air, go outside.
For exercise, take a walk.
For creative stimulation, go somewhere new.
For companionship, make a friend.
For self-esteem, turn off your TV, breathe deep and open your spirit to the basic goodness of the world.
Things like food and shelter are much cheaper once you get outside the United States.
See 5 below for ways to obtain food and shelter for free.
3．Go Slow
If you live in New York and want to take a 2-week vacation to Africa, it will be very difficult (though not impossible, see 8 below) to travel for free.
Indeed, as long as you believe that time is money, you will spend money all the time.
Time is not money.
Time is free.
You have all the time in the world.
Instead of buying a plane ticket, catch a ride out West, or remodel an old sailboat, or just hop on your bike and ride away from town.
The slower you travel, the less money you will spend.
4．Leave Your Possessions and Obsessions Behind
When you travel, you don't need to pay rent.
You don't need a car.
You don't need an oven, a washer-dryer, electricity, Cable TV, a gym membership, a sofa and loveseat or a closet full of clothes.
You don't need a suit and tie to wear to your job because you don't need a job.
You don't need to worry about paying the bills, because there are no bills to pay.
You are free.
5．Trust People and You Will Receive Free Food and Lodging
Many people are willing to open their homes to travelers, and they will give you a free meal, too.
CouchSurfing and WWOOF are two phenomenal online networks that help travelers connect with local hosts.
CouchSurfing members are willing to give travelers a place to sleep for a night or two.
WWOOF connects travelers with organic farmers who want to trade room and board for an extra hand.
6．Learn a Useful Craft or Skill
If you have a skill, such as cooking, animal husbandry, massage, musical ability or basic carpentry, you can barter for free food and accommodation as you travel.
Universally appreciated skills like cooking are best, though niche skills that are in high demand, like website design, are also useful.
Native English speakers can often travel the world for free by teaching language classes in each destination they visit.
The slower you travel, the easier it will be to work out a mutually beneficial arrangement with a local community or host.
7．Get Out of the City
Although it's possible to travel for free in a big city, it's damn difficult.
Go to the country, where people are more relaxed, food is plentiful and there's ample room for one traveler to lay out her sleeping bag under the stars.
8．Find a Job You Love That Entails Travel
If you need an income in order to pay off loans or support a child, find a job that calls for extensive travel.
There are millions of jobs available in the global economy that demand travel.
Of course, some jobs are easier to love than others, and much work that involves travel also involves the destruction of local ecosystems and traditional ways of life.
Avoid unethical work if at all possible - it is bad for your health and worse for your soul.
9．Embrace Serendipity
Traveling the world for free requires a blend of advance planning and the willingness to seize opportunities and go with the flow.
Does your new CouchSurfing friend want company for a drive across the country?
Grab your pack and ride along!
Does an organic farm in Thailand need a farm sitter for the rainy season?
Get in touch with Christian Shearer!
As Kurt Vonnegut wrote, "Peculiar travel suggestions are dancing lessons from God. "
Go Dancing.
The most important day I remember in all my life is the one on which my teacher, Anne Mansfield Sullivan, came to me.
I am filled with wonder when I consider the immeasurable contrasts between the two lives which connects.
It was the third of March, 1887, three months before I was seven years old.
On the afternoon of that eventful day, I stood on the porch, dumb, expectant.
I guessed vaguely from my mother's signs and from the hurrying to and fro in the house that something unusual was about to happen, so I went to the door and waited on the steps.
The afternoon sun penetrated the mass of honeysuckle that covered the porch, and fell on my upturned face.
My fingers lingered almost unconsciously on the familiar leaves and blossoms which had just come forth to greet the sweet southern spring.
I did not know what the future held of marvel or surprise for me.
Anger and bitterness had preyed upon me continually for weeks and a deep languor had succeeded this passionate struggle.
Have you ever been at sea in a dense fog, when it seemed as if a tangible white darkness shut you in, and the great ship, tense and anxious, groped her way toward the shore with plummet and sounding-line, and you waited with beating heart for something to happen?
I was like that ship before my education began, only I was without compass or sounding-line, and had no way of knowing how near the harbour was. "
Light!
give me light! "
was the wordless cry of my soul, and the light of love shone on me in that very tour.
I felt approaching footsteps, I stretched out my hand as I supposed to my mother.
Some one took it, and I was caught up and held close in the arms of her who had come to reveal all things to me, and, more than all things else, to love me.
The morning after my teacher came she led me into her room and gave me a doll.
The little blind children at the Perkins Institution had sent it and Laura Bridgman had dressed it; but I did not know this until afterward.
When I had played with it a little while, Miss Sullivan slowly spelled into my hand the word "d-o-1-1".
I was at once interested in this finger play and tried to imitate it.
When I finally succeeded in making the letters correctly I was flushed with childish pleasure and pride.
Running downstairs to my mother I held up my hand and made the letters for doll.
I did not know that I was spelling a word or even that words existed; I was simply making my fingers go in monkey-like imitation.
In the days that followed I learned to spell in this uncomprehending way a great many words, among them pin, hat, cup and a few verbs like sit, stand and walk.
But my teacher had been with me several weeks before I understood that everything has a name.
One day, while I was playing with my new doll, Miss Sullivan put my big rag doll into my lap also, spelled "d-o-1-1" and tried to make me understand that "d-o-1-1" applied to both.
Earlier in the day we had had a tussle over the words "m-u-g" and "w-a-t-e-r".
Miss Sullivan had tried to impress it upon me that "m-u-g" is mug and that "w-a-t-e-r" is water, but I persisted in confounding the two.
In despair she had dropped the subject for the time, only to renew it at the first opportunity.
I became impatient at her repeated attempts and, seizing the new doll, I dashed it upon the floor.
I was keenly delighted when I felt the fragments of the broken doll at my feet.
Neither sorrow nor regret followed my passionate outburst.
I had not loved the doll.
In the still, dark world in which I lived there was no strong sentiment or tenderness.
I felt my teacher sweep the fragments to one side of the hearth and I had a sense of satisfaction that the cause of my discomfort was removed.
She brought me my hat, and I knew I was going out into the warm sunshine.
This thought, if a wordless sensation may be called a thought, made me hop and skip with pleasure.
We walked down the path to the well-house, attracted by the fragrance of the honeysuckle with which it was covered.
Someone was drawing water and my teacher placed my hand under the spout.
As the cool stream gushed over one hand she spelled into the other the word water, first slowly, then rapidly.
I stood still, my whole attention fixed upon the motions of her fingers.
Suddenly I felt a misty consciousness as of something forgotten - a thrill of returning thought; and somehow the mystery of language was revealed to me.
I knew then that "w-a-t-e-r" meant the wonderful cool something that was flowing over my hand.
That living word awakened my soul, gave it light, hope, joy, set it free!
There were barriers still, it is true, but barriers that could in time be swept away.
Mother, let us imagine we are travelling and passing through a strange and dangerous country.
You are riding in a palanquin and I am trotting by you on a red horse.
It is evening and the sun goes down.
The waste of Joradighi lies wan and grey before us.
The land is desolate and barren.
You are frightened and thinking - "I know not where we have come to. "
I say to you, "Mother, do not be afraid. "
The meadow is prickly with spiky grass, and through it runs a narrow broken path.
There are no cattle to be seen in the wide field; they have gone to their village stalls.
It grows dark and dim on the land and sky, and we cannot tell where we are going.
Suddenly you call me and ask me in a whisper, "What light is that near the bank? "
Just then there bursts out a fearful yell, and figures come running towards us.
You sit crouched in your palanquin and repeat the names of the gods in prayer.
The bearers, shaking in terror, hide themselves in the thorny bush.
I shout to you, "Don't be afraid, mother, I am here. "
With long sticks in their hands and hair all wild about their heads, they come nearer and nearer.
I shout, "Have a care!
You villains!
One step more and you are dead men. "
They give another terrible yell and rush forward.
You clutch my hand and say, "Dear boy, for heaven's sake, keep away from them. "
I say, "Mother, just you watch me. "
Then I spur my horse for a wild gallop, and my sword and buckler clash against each other.
The fight becomes so fearful, mother, that it would give you a cold shudder could you see it from your palanquin.
Many of them fly, and a great number are cut to pieces.
I know you are thinking, sitting all by yourself, that your boy must be dead by this time.
But I come to you all stained with blood, and say, "Mother, the fight is over now. "
You come out and kiss me, pressing me to your heart, and you say to yourself,
" I don't know what I should do if I hadn't my boy to escort me. "
A thousand useless things happen day after day, and why couldn't such a thing come true by chance?
It would be like a story in a book.
My brother would say, "Is it possible?
I always thought he was so delicate! "
Our village people would all say in amazement, "Was it not lucky that the boy was with his mother? "
How wonderful are islands!
Islands in space, like this one I come to, ringed about by miles of water, linked by no bridges, no cables, no telephones.
An island from the world and the world's life.
Islands in time, like this short vacation of mine.
The past and the future are cut off; only the present remains.
Existence in the present gives island living an extreme vividness and purity.
One lives like a child or a saint in the immediacy of here and now.
Every day, every act, is an island, washed by time and space, and has an island's completion.
People, too, become like islands in such an atmosphere, self-contained, whole and serene; respecting other people's solitude, not intruding on their shores, standing back in reverence before the miracle of another individual. "
No man is an island," said John Donne.
I feel we are all islands - in a common sea.
We are all, in the last analysis, alone.
And this basic state of solitude is not something we have any choice about.
It is, as the poet Rilke says, "not something that one can take or leave.
We are solitary.
We may delude ourselves and act as though this were not so.
That is all.
But how much better is it to realize that we are so, yes, even to begin by assuming it." "
Naturally," he goes on to say, "we will turn giddy. "
We seem so frightened today of being alone that we never let it happen.
Even if family, friends and movies should fail, there is still the radio or television to fill up the void.
Women, who used to complain of loneliness, need never be alone any more.
We can do our housework with soap-opera heroes at our side.
Even day-dreaming was more creative than this; it demanded something of oneself and it fed the inner life.
Now instead of planting our solitude with our dream blossoms, we choke the space with continuous music, chatter and companionship to which we do not even listen.
It is simply there to fill the vacuum.
When the noise stops there is no inner music to take its place.
We must relearn to be alone.
The day started out rotten.
She overslept and was late for work.
Everything that happened at the office contributed to her nervous frenzy.
By the time she reached the bus stop for her homeward trip, her stomach was one big knot.
As usual, the bus was late and jammed.
She had to stand in the aisle.
As the lurching vehicle pulled her in all directions, her gloom deepened.
Then she heard a voice from up front boom, "Beautiful day, isn't it? "
Because of the crowd, she could not see the man, but she heard him as he continued to comment on the spring scenery, calling attention to each approaching landmark.
This church.
That park.
This cemetery.
That firehouse.
Soon all the passengers were gazing out the windows.
The man's enthusiasm was so contagious that she found herself smiling for the first time that day.
They reached her stop.
Maneuvering toward the door, she got a look at their "guide": an older gentleman with a beard, wearing dark glasses and carrying a thin, white cane.
Ah, these jasmines, these white jasmines!
I seem to remember the first day when I filled my hands with these jasmines, these white jasmines.
I have loved the sunlight, the sky and the green earth;
I have heard the liquid murmur of the river through the darkness of midnight;
Autumn sunsets have come to me at the bend of a road in the lonely waste, like a bride raising her veil to accept her lover.
Yet my memory is still sweet with the first white jasmines that I held in my hand when I was a child.
Many a glad day has come in my life, and I have laughed with merrymakers on festival nights.
On grey mornings of rain I have crooned many an idle song.
I have worn round my neck the evening wreath of bakulaswoven by the hand of love.
Yet my heart is sweet with the memory of the first fresh jasmines that filled my hands when I was a child.