There was one wild burst of laughter over the whole face of the world.
True, the capture of Arsène Lupin made a big sensation; and the public did not grudge the police the praise which they deserved for this revenge so long hoped-for and now so fully obtained. The great adventurer was caught.
That extraordinary, genial, invisible hero was shivering, like any ordinary criminal, between the four walls of a prison cell, crushed in his turn by that formidable power which is called the law and which, sooner or later, by inevitable necessity shatters the obstacles opposed to it and destroys the work of its adversaries.
All this was said, printed, repeated and discussed ad nauseam. The prefect of police was created a commander, M. Weber an officer of the Legion of Honor. The skill and courage of their humblest coadjutors were extolled to the skies. Cheers were raised and paeans of victory struck up.
Articles were written and speeches made.
Very well.
But one thing, nevertheless, rose above the wonderful concert of praise, these noisy demonstrations of satisfaction; and that was an immense, spontaneous, inextinguishable and tumultuous roar of laughter.
Arsène Lupin had been chief of the detective-service for four years!!
!
He had been chief detective for four years and, really, legally, he was chief detective still, with all the rights which the title confers, enjoying the esteem of his chiefs, the favor of the government and the admiration of the public.
For four years, the public peace and the defence of property had been entrusted to Arsène Lupin.
He saw that the law was carried out.
He protected the innocent and pursued the guilty.
And what services he had rendered! Never was order less disturbed, never was crime discovered with greater certainty and rapidity.
The reader need but take back his mind to the Denizou case, the robbery at the Crédit Lyonnais, the attack on the Orléans express, the murder of Baron Dorf, forming a series of unforeseen and overwhelming triumphs, of magnificent feats of prowess fit to compare with the most famous victories of the most renowned detectives.
The murder of Baron Dorf, that mysterious and disconcerting affair, will one day be the subject of a story which will give an idea of Arsène Lupin's astonishing qualities as a detective.
Not so very long before, in a speech delivered at the time of the fire at the Louvre and the capture of the incendiaries, Valenglay, the prime minister, had said, speaking in defence of the somewhat arbitrary manner in which M. Lenormand had acted on that occasion:
"With his great powers of discernment, his energy, his qualities of decision and execution, his unexpected methods, his inexhaustible resources, M. Lenormand reminds us of the only man who, if he were still alive, could hope to hold his own against him: I mean Arsène Lupin.
M. Lenormand is an Arsène Lupin in the service of society."
And, lo and behold, M. Lenormand was none other than Arsène Lupin!
That he was a Russian prince, who cared!
Lupin was an old hand at such changes of personality as that.
But chief detective!
What a delicious irony!
What a whimsical humor in the conduct of that extraordinary life!
M. Lenormand!
... Arsène Lupin!
...
People were now able to explain to themselves the apparently miraculous feats of intelligence which had quite recently bewildered the crowd and baffled the police.
They understood how his accomplice had been juggled away in the middle of the Palais de Justice itself, in broad daylight and on the appointed day.
Had he himself not said:
"My process is so ingenious and so simple... How surprised people will be on the day when I am free to speak!
'Is that all?'
I shall be asked.
That is all; but it had to be thought of."
It was, indeed, childishly simple: all you had to do was to be chief of the detective-service.
Well, Lupin was chief of the detective-service; and every police-officer obeying his orders had made himself the involuntary and unconscious accomplice of Arsène Lupin.
What a comedy! What admirable bluff! It was the monumental and consoling farce of these drab times of ours. Lupin in prison, Lupin irretrievably conquered was, in spite of himself, the great conqueror. From his cell he shone over Paris.
He was more than ever the idol, more than ever the master.
When Arsène Lupin awoke next morning, in his room at the "Santé Palace," as he at once nicknamed it, he had a very clear vision of the enormous sensation which would be produced by his arrest under the double name of Sernine and Lenormand and the double title of prince and chief of the detective-service.
He rubbed his hands and gave vent to his thoughts:
"A man can have no better companion in his loneliness than the approval of his contemporaries.
O fame!
The sun of all living men!
..."
Seen by daylight, his cell pleased him even better than at night. The window, placed high up in the wall, afforded a glimpse of the branches of a tree, through which peeped the blue of the sky above. The walls were white.
There was only one table and one chair, both fastened to the floor.
But everything was quite nice and clean.
"Come," he said, "a little rest-cure here will be rather charming...
But let us see to our toilet... Have I all I want?
... No...
In that case, ring twice for the chambermaid."
He pressed the button of an apparatus beside the door, which released a signaling-disc in the corridor.
After a moment, bolts and bars were drawn outside, a key turned in the lock and a warder appeared.
"Hot water, please," said Lupin.
The other looked at him with an air of mingled amazement and rage.
"Oh," said Lupin, "and a bath-towel!
By Jove, there's no bath-towel!"
The man growled:
"You're getting at me, aren't you?
You'd better be careful!"
He was going away, when Lupin caught him roughly by the arm:
"Here!
A hundred francs if you'll post a letter for me."
He took out a hundred-franc note, which he had concealed during the search, and offered it to him.
"Where's the letter?"
said the warder, taking the money.
"Just give me a moment to write it."
He sat down at the table, scribbled a few words in pencil on a sheet of paper, put it in an envelope and addressed the letter:
"To Monsieur S. B.
42,
"Poste Restante,
"Paris."
The warder took the letter and walked away.
"That letter," said Lupin to himself, "will reach destination as safely as if I delivered it myself.
I shall have the reply in an hour at latest: just the time I want to take a good look into my position."
He sat down on his chair and, in an undertone, summed up the situation as follows:
"When all is said and done, I have two adversaries to fight at the present moment. There is, first, society, which holds me and which I can afford to laugh at.
Secondly, there is a person unknown, who does not hold me, but whom I am not inclined to laugh at in the very least.
It is he who told the police that I was Sernine.
It was he who guessed that I was M. Lenormand.
It was he who locked the door of the underground passage and it was he who had me clapped into prison."
Ars&#232;ne Lupin reflected for a second and then continued:
"So, at long last, the struggle lies between him and me.
And, to keep up that struggle, that is to say, to discover and get to the bottom of the Kesselbach case, here am I, a prisoner, while he is free, unknown, and inaccessible, and holds the two trump-cards which I considered mine: Pierre Leduc and old Steinweg...
In short, he is near the goal, after finally pushing me back."
A fresh contemplative pause, followed by a fresh soliloquy:
"The position is far from brilliant.
On the one side, everything; on the other, nothing.
Opposite me, a man of my own strength, or stronger, because he has not the same scruples that hamper me.
And I am without weapons to attack him with."
He repeated the last sentence several times, in a mechanical voice, and then stopped and, taking his forehead between his hands, sat for a long time wrapped in thought.
"Come in, Mr.
Governor," he said, seeing the door open.
"Were you expecting me?"
"Why, I wrote to you, Mr.
Governor, asking you to come!
I felt certain that the warder would give you my letter.
I was so certain of it that I put your initials, S. B., and your age, forty-two, on the envelope!"
The governor's name, in point of fact, was Stanislas Bor&#233;ly, and he was forty-two years of age.
He was a pleasant-looking man, with a very gentle character, who treated the prisoners with all the indulgence possible.
He said to Lupin:
"Your opinion of my subordinate's integrity was quite correct.
Here is your money.
It shall be handed to you at your release... You will now go through the searching-room again."
Lupin went with M. Bor&#233;ly to the little room reserved for this purpose, undressed and, while his clothes were inspected with justifiable suspicion, himself underwent a most fastidious examination.
He was then taken back to his cell and M. Bor&#233;ly said:
"I feel easier.
That's done."
"And very well done, Mr.
Governor.
Your men perform this sort of duty with a delicacy for which I should like to thank them by giving them a small token of my satisfaction."
He handed a hundred-franc note to M. Bor&#233;ly, who jumped as though he had been shot:
"Oh!
...
But ... where does that come from?"
"No need to rack your brains, Mr.
Governor.
A man like myself, leading the life that I do, is always prepared for any eventuality: and no mishap, however painful &#8212; not even imprisonment &#8212; can take him unawares."
Seizing the middle finger of his left hand between the thumb and forefinger of the right, he pulled it off smartly and presented it calmly to M. Bor&#233;ly:
"Don't start like that, Mr. Governor. This is not my finger, but just a tube, made of gold-beater's skin and cleverly colored, which fits exactly over my middle finger and gives the illusion of a real finger."
And he added, with a laugh, "In such a way, of course, as to conceal a third hundred-franc note... What is a poor man to do?
He must carry the best purse he can ... and must needs make use of it on occasions..."
He stopped at the sight of M. Bor&#233;ly's startled face:
"Please don't think, Mr. Governor, that I wish to dazzle you with my little parlor-tricks.
I only wanted to show you that you have to do with a ... client of a rather ... special nature and to tell you that you must not be surprised if I venture, now and again, to break the ordinary rules and regulations of your establishment."
The governor had recovered himself.
He said plainly:
"I prefer to think that you will conform to the rules and not compel me to resort to harsh measures..."
"Which you would regret to have to enforce: isn't that it, Mr. Governor?
That's just what I should like to spare you, by proving to you in advance that they would not prevent me from doing as I please: from corresponding with my friends, from defending the grave interests confided to me outside these walls, from writing to the newspapers that accept my inspiration, from pursuing the fulfilment of my plans and, lastly, from preparing my escape."
"Your escape!"
Lupin began to laugh heartily:
"But think, Mr.
Governor, my only excuse for being in prison is ... to leave it!"
The argument did not appear to satisfy M. Bor&#233;ly.
He made an effort to laugh in his turn:
"Forewarned is forearmed," he said.
"That's what I wanted," Lupin replied. "Take all your precautions, Mr. Governor, neglect nothing, so that later they may have nothing to reproach you with.
On the other hand, I shall arrange things in such a way that, whatever annoyance you may have to bear in consequence of my escape, your career, at least, shall not suffer.
That is all I had to say to you, Mr. Governor.
You can go."
And, while M. Bor&#233;ly walked away, greatly perturbed by his singular charge and very anxious about the events in preparation, the prisoner threw himself on his bed, muttering:
"What cheek, Lupin, old fellow, what cheek!
Really, any one would think that you had some idea as to how you were going to get out of this!"
The Sant&#233; prison is built on the star plan.
In the centre of the main portion is a round hall, upon which all the corridors converge, so that no prisoner is able to leave his cell without being at once perceived by the overseers posted in the glass box which occupies the middle of that central hall.
The thing that most surprises the visitor who goes over the prison is that, at every moment, he will meet prisoners without a guard of any kind, who seem to move about as though they were absolutely free.
In reality, in order to go from one point to another &#8212; for instance, from their cell to the van waiting in the yard to take them to the Palais de Justice for the magistrate's examination &#8212; they pass along straight lines each of which ends in a door that is opened to them by a warder.
The sole duty of the warder is to open and shut this door and to watch the two straight lines which it commands.
And thus the prisoners, while apparently at liberty to come and go as they please, are sent from door to door, from eye to eye, like so many parcels passed from hand to hand.
Outside, municipal guards receive the object and pack it into one of the compartments of the "salad-basket."
The French slang expression for its prison-van or "black Maria."
&#8212; Translator's Note.
This is the ordinary routine.
In Lupin's case it was disregarded entirely.
The police were afraid of that walk along the corridors.
They were afraid of the prison-van.
They were afraid of everything.
M. Weber came in person, accompanied by twelve constables &#8212; the best he had, picked men, armed to the teeth &#8212; fetched the formidable prisoner at the door of his cell and took him in a cab, the driver of which was one of his own men, with mounted municipal guards trotting on each side, in front and behind.
"Bravo!" cried Lupin. "I am quite touched by the compliment paid me. A guard of honor. By Jove, Weber, you have the proper hierarchical instinct! You don't forget what is due to your immediate chief." And, tapping him on the shoulder: "Weber, I intend to send in my resignation.
I shall name you as my successor."
"It's almost done," said Weber.
"That's good news!
I was a little anxious about my escape.
Now I am easy in my mind.
From the moment when Weber is chief of the detective-service ...
!"
M. Weber did not reply to the gibe.
At heart, he had a queer, complex feeling in the presence of his adversary, a feeling made up of the fear with which Lupin inspired him, the deference which he entertained for Prince Sernine and the respectful admiration which he had always shown to M. Lenormand.
All this was mingled with spite, envy and satisfied hatred.
They arrived at the Palais de Justice.
At the foot of the "mouse-trap," a number of detectives were waiting, among whom M. Weber rejoiced to see his best two lieutenants, the brothers Doudeville.
"Has M. Formerie come?"
he asked.
"Yes, chief, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction is in his room."
M. Weber went up the stairs, followed by Lupin, who had the Doudevilles on either side of him.
"Genevi&#232;ve?"
whispered the prisoner.
"Saved..."
"Where is she?"
"With her grandmother."
"Mrs.
Kesselbach?"
"In Paris, at the Bristol."
"Suzanne?"
"Disappeared."
"Steinweg?"
"Released."
"What has he told you?"
"Nothing.
Won't make any revelations except to you."
"Why?"
"We told him he owed his release to you."
"Newspapers good this morning?"
"Excellent."
"Good.
If you want to write to me, here are my instructions."
They had reached the inner corridor on the first floor and Lupin slipped a pellet of paper into the hand of one of the brothers.
M. Formerie uttered a delicious phrase when Lupin entered his room accompanied by the deputy-chief:
"Ah, there you are!
I knew we should lay hands on you some day or other!"
"So did I, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction," said Lupin, "and I am glad that you have been marked out by fate to do justice to the honest man that I am."
"He's getting at me," thought M. Formerie.
And, in the same ironical and serious tone as Lupin, he retorted, "The honest man that you are, sir, will be asked what he has to say about three hundred and forty-four separate cases of larceny, burglary, swindling and forgery, blackmail, receiving and so on.
Three hundred and forty-four!"
"What!
Is that all?"
cried Lupin.
"I really feel quite ashamed."
"Don't distress yourself!
I shall discover more.
But let us proceed in order.
Ars&#232;ne Lupin, in spite of all our inquiries, we have no definite information as to your real name."
"How odd!
No more have I!"
"We are not even in a position to declare that you are the same Ars&#232;ne Lupin who was confined in the Sant&#233; a few years back, and from there made his first escape."
"'His first escape' is good, and does you credit."
"It so happens, in fact," continued M. Formerie, "that the Ars&#232;ne Lupin card in the measuring department gives a description of Ars&#232;ne Lupin which differs at all points from your real description."
"How more and more odd!"
"Different marks, different measurements, different finger-prints...
The two photographs even are quite unlike.
I will therefore ask you to satisfy us as to your exact identity."
"That's just what I was going to ask you.
I have lived under so many distinct names that I have ended by forgetting my own.
I don't know where I am."
"So I must enter a refusal to answer?"
"An inability."
"Is this a thought-out plan?
Am I to expect the same silence in reply to all my questions?"
"Very nearly."
"And why?"
Lupin struck a solemn attitude and said:
"M. le Juge d'Instruction, my life belongs to history. You have only to turn over the annals of the past fifteen years and your curiosity will be satisfied. So much for my part.
As to the rest, it does not concern me: it is an affair between you and the murderers at the Palace Hotel."
"Ars&#232;ne Lupin, the honest man that you are will have to-day to explain the murder of Master Altenheim."
"Hullo, this is new!
Is the idea yours, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction?"
"Exactly."
"Very clever!
Upon my word, M. Formerie, you're getting on!"
"The position in which you were captured leaves no doubt."
"None at all; only, I will venture to ask you this: what sort of wound did Altenheim die of?"
"Of a wound in the throat caused by a knife."
"And where is the knife?"
"It has not been found."
"How could it not have been found, if I had been the assassin, considering that I was captured beside the very man whom I am supposed to have killed?"
"Who killed him, according to you?"
"The same man that killed Mr. Kesselbach, Chapman, and Beudot.
The nature of the wound is a sufficient proof."
"How did he get away?"
"Through a trap-door, which you will discover in the room where the tragedy took place."
M. Formerie assumed an air of slyness:
"And how was it that you did not follow that useful example?"
"I tried to follow it. But the outlet was blocked by a door which I could not open. It was during this attempt that 'the other one' came back to the room and killed his accomplice for fear of the revelations which he would have been sure to make.
At the same time, he hid in a cupboard, where it was subsequently found, the parcel of clothes which I had prepared."
"What were those clothes for?"
"To disguise myself.
When I went to the Glycines my plan was this: to hand Altenheim over to the police, to suppress my own identity as Prince Sernine and to reappear under the features..."
"Of M. Lenormand, I suppose?"
"Exactly."
"No."
"What!"
M. Formerie gave a knowing smile and wagged his forefinger from left to right and right to left:
"No," he repeated.
"What do you mean by 'no'?"
"That story about M. Lenormand..."
"Well?"
"Will do for the public, my friend. But you won't make M. Formerie swallow that Lupin and Lenormand were one and the same man." He burst out laughing. "Lupin, chief of the detective-service! No, anything you like, but not that! ... There are limits... I am an easy-going fellow...
I'll believe anything ... but still... Come, between ourselves, what was the reason of this fresh hoax? ...
I confess I can't see ..."
Lupin looked at him in astonishment. In spite of all that he knew of M. Formerie, he could not conceive such a degree of infatuation and blindness.
There was at that moment only one person in the world who refused to believe in Prince Sernine's double personality; and that was M. Formerie! ...
Lupin turned to the deputy-chief, who stood listening open-mouthed:
"My dear Weber, I fear your promotion is not so certain as I thought.
For, you see, if M. Lenormand is not myself, then he exists ... and, if he exists, I have no doubt that M. Formerie, with all his acumen, will end by discovering him ... in which case ..."
"We shall discover him all right, M. Lupin," cried the examining-magistrate. "I'll undertake that, and I tell you that, when you and he are confronted, we shall see some fun." He chuckled and drummed with his fingers on the table. "How amusing!
Oh, one's never bored when you're there, that I'll say for you!
So you're M. Lenormand, and it's you who arrested your accomplice Marco!"
"Just so!
Wasn't it my duty to please the prime minister and save the cabinet?
The fact is historical."
M. Formerie held his sides:
"Oh, I shall die of laughing, I know I shall!
Lord, what a joke!
That answer will travel round the world.
So, according to your theory, it was with you that I made the first enquiries at the Palace Hotel after the murder of Mr. Kesselbach?
..."
"Surely it was with me that you investigated the case of the stolen coronet when I was Duc de Chamerace," retorted Lupin, in a sarcastic voice.
See Arsène Lupin by Edgar Jepson and Maurice Leblanc.
M. Formerie gave a start.
All his merriment was dispelled by that odious recollection.
Turning suddenly grave, he asked:
"So you persist in that absurd theory?"
"I must, because it is the truth.
It would be easy for you to take a steamer to Cochin-China and to find at Saigon the proofs of the death of the real M. Lenormand, the worthy man whom I replaced and whose death-certificate I can show you."
"Humbug!"
"Upon my word, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, I don't care one way or the other. If it annoys you that I should be M. Lenormand, don't let's talk about it. We won't talk about myself; we won't talk about anything at all, if you prefer.
Besides, of what use can it be to you?
The Kesselbach case is such a tangled affair that I myself don't know where I stand.
There's only one man who might help you.
I have not succeeded in discovering him.
And I don't think that you ..."
"What's the man's name?"
"He's an old man, a German called Steinweg...
But, of course, you've heard about him, Weber, and the way in which he was carried off in the middle of the Palais de Justice?"
M. Formerie threw an inquiring glance at the deputy-chief.
M. Weber said:
"I undertake to bring that person to you, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction."
"So that's done," said M. Formerie, rising from his chair.
"As you see, Lupin, this was merely a formal examination to bring the two duelists together.
Now that we have crossed swords, all that we need is the necessary witness of our fencing-match, your counsel."
"Tut!
Is it indispensable?"
"Indispensable."
"Employ counsel in view of such an unlikely trial?"
"You must."
"In that case, I'll choose Maître Quimbel."
"The president of the corporation of the bar.
You are wise, you will be well defended."
The first sitting was over.
M. Weber led the prisoner away.
As he went down the stairs of the "mouse-trap," between the two Doudevilles, Lupin said, in short, imperative sentences:
"Watch Steinweg... Don't let him speak to anybody... Be there to-morrow...
I'll give you some letters ... one for you ...
important."
Downstairs, he walked up to the municipal guards surrounding the taxi-cab:
"Home, boys," he exclaimed, "and quick about it!
I have an appointment with myself for two o'clock precisely."
There were no incidents during the drive.
On returning to his cell, Lupin wrote a long letter, full of detailed instructions, to the brothers Doudeville and, two other letters.
One was for Geneviève:
"Geneviève, you now know who I am and you will understand why I concealed from you the name of him who twice carried you away in his arms when you were a little girl.
"Geneviève, I was your mother's friend, a distant friend, of whose double life she knew nothing, but upon whom she thought that she could rely.
And that is why, before dying, she wrote me a few lines asking me to watch over you.
"Unworthy as I am of your esteem, Geneviève, I shall continue faithful to that trust.
Do not drive me from your heart entirely.
"Arsène Lupin."
The other letter was addressed to Dolores Kesselbach:
"Prince Sernine was led to seek Mrs. Kesselbach's acquaintance by motives of self-interest alone.
But a great longing to devote himself to her was the cause of his continuing it.
"Now that Prince Sernine has become merely Arsène Lupin, he begs Mrs. Kesselbach not to deprive him of the right of protecting her, at a distance and as a man protects one whom he will never see again."
There were some envelopes on the table. He took up one and took up a second; then, when he took up the third, he noticed a sheet of white paper, the presence of which surprised him and which had words stuck upon it, evidently cut out of a newspaper.
He read:
"You have failed in your fight with the baron.
Give up interesting yourself in the case, and I will not oppose your escape.
"L. M."
Once more, Lupin had that sense of repulsion and terror with which this nameless and fabulous being always inspired him, a sense of disgust which one feels at touching a venomous animal, a reptile:
"He again," he said.
"Even here!"
That also scared him, the sudden vision which he at times received of this hostile power, a power as great as his own and disposing of formidable means, the extent of which he himself was unable to realize.
He at once suspected his warder.
But how had it been possible to corrupt that hard-featured, stern-eyed man?
"Well, so much the better, after all!" he cried. "I have never had to do except with dullards... In order to fight myself, I had to chuck myself into the command of the detective-service... This time, I have some one to deal with! ...
Here's a man who puts me in his pocket ... by sleight of hand, one might say...
If I succeed, from my prison cell, in avoiding his blows and smashing him, in seeing old Steinweg and dragging his confession from him, in setting the Kesselbach case on its legs and turning the whole of it into cash, in defending Mrs. Kesselbach and winning fortune and happiness for Geneviève ... well, then Lupin will be Lupin still!
..."
Eleven days passed.
On the twelfth day, Lupin woke very early and exclaimed:
"Let me see, if my calculations are correct and if the gods are on my side, there will be some news to-day. I have had four interviews with Formerie. The fellow must be worked up to the right point now.
And the Doudevilles, on their side, must have been busy... We shall have some fun!"
He flung out his fists to right and left, brought them back to his chest, then flung them out again and brought them back again.
This movement, which executed thirty times in succession, was followed by a bending of his body backwards and forwards.
Next came an alternate lifting of the legs and then an alternate swinging of the arms.
The whole performance occupied a quarter of an hour, the quarter of an hour which he devoted every morning to Swedish exercises to keep his muscles in condition.
Then he sat down to his table, took up some sheets of white paper, which were arranged in numbered packets, and, folding one of them, made it into an envelope, a work which he continued to do with a series of successive sheets.
It was the task which he had accepted and which he forced himself to do daily, the prisoners having the right to choose the labor which they preferred: sticking envelopes, making paper fans, metal purses, and so on...
And, in this way, while occupying his hands with an automatic exercise and keeping his muscles supple with mechanical bendings, Lupin was able to have his thoughts constantly fixed on his affairs...
And his affairs were complicated enough, in all conscience!
There was one, for instance, which surpassed all the others in importance, and for which he had to employ all the resources of his genius. How was he to have a long, quiet conversation with old Steinweg? The necessity was immediate.
In a few days, Steinweg would have recovered from his imprisonment, would receive interviews, might blab ... to say nothing of the inevitable interference of the enemy, 'the other one.'
And it was essential that Steinweg's secret, Pierre Leduc's secret, should be revealed to no one but Lupin.
Once published, the secret lost all its value...
The bolts grated, the key turned noisily in the lock.
"Ah, it's you, most excellent of jailers!
Has the moment come for the last toilet?
The hair-cut that precedes the great final cut of all?"
"Magistrate's examination," said the man, laconically.
Lupin walked through the corridors of the prison and was received by the municipal guards, who locked him into the prison-van.
He reached the Palais de Justice twenty minutes later.
One of the Doudevilles was waiting near the stairs.
As they went up, he said to Lupin:
"You'll be confronted to-day."
"Everything settled?"
"Yes."
"Weber?"
"Busy elsewhere."
Lupin walked into M. Formerie's room and at once recognized old Steinweg, sitting on a chair, looking ill and wretched.
A municipal guard was standing behind him.
M. Formerie scrutinized the prisoner attentively, as though he hoped to draw important conclusions from his contemplation of him, and said:
"You know who this gentleman is?"
"Why, Steinweg, of course!
..."
"Yes, thanks to the active inquiries of M. Weber and of his two officers, the brothers Doudeville, we have found Mr. Steinweg, who, according to you, knows the ins and outs of the Kesselbach case, the name of the murderer and all the rest of it."
"I congratulate you, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction.
Your examination will go swimmingly."
"I think so.
There is only one 'but': Mr. Steinweg refuses to reveal anything, except in your presence."
"Well, I never!
How odd of him!
Does Arsène Lupin inspire him with so much affection and esteem?"
"Not Arsène Lupin, but Prince Sernine, who, he says, saved his life, and M. Lenormand, with whom, he says, he began a conversation..."
"At the time when I was chief of the detective-service," Lupin broke in.
"So you consent to admit."
"Mr. Steinweg," said the magistrate, "do you recognize M.
Lenormand?"
"No, but I know that Arsène Lupin and he are one."
"So you consent to speak?"
"Yes ... but ... we are not alone."
"How do you mean?
There is only my clerk here ... and the guard ..."
"Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, the secret which I am about to reveal is so important that you yourself would be sorry ..."
"Guard, go outside, please," said M. Formerie.
"Come back at once, if I call.
Do you object to my clerk, Steinweg?"
"No, no ... it might be better ... but, however ..."
"Then speak.
For that matter, nothing that you reveal will be put down in black on white.
One word more, though: I ask you for the last time, is it indispensable that the prisoner should be present at this interview?"
"Quite indispensable.
You will see the reason for yourself."
He drew the chair up to the magistrate's desk, Lupin remained standing, near the clerk.
And the old man, speaking in a loud voice, said:
"It is now ten years since a series of circumstances, which I need not enter into, made me acquainted with an extraordinary story in which two persons are concerned."
"Their names, please."
"I will give the names presently.
For the moment, let me say that one of these persons occupies an exceptional position in France, and that the other, an Italian, or rather a Spaniard ... yes, a Spaniard ..."
A bound across the room, followed by two formidable blows of the fist... Lupin's two arms had darted out to right and left, as though impelled by springs and his two fists, hard as cannon balls, caught the magistrate and his clerk on the jaw, just below the ear.
The magistrate and the clerk collapsed over their tables, in two lumps, without a moan.
"Well hit!"
said Lupin.
"That was a neat bit of work."
He went to the door and locked it softly.
Then returning:
"Steinweg, have you the chloroform?"
"Are you quite sure that they have fainted?"
asks the old man, trembling with fear.
"What do you think!
But it will only last for three or four minutes... And that is not long enough."
The German produced from his pocket a bottle and two pads of cotton-wool, ready prepared.
Lupin uncorked the bottle, poured a few drops of the chloroform on the two pads and held them to the noses of the magistrate and his clerk.
"Capital! We have ten minutes of peace and quiet before us. That will do, but let's make haste, all the same; and not a word too much, old man, do you hear?" He took him by the arm. "You see what I am able to do.
Here we are, alone in the very heart of the Palais de Justice, because I wished it."
"Yes," said the old man.
"So you are going to tell me your secret?"
"Yes, I told it to Kesselbach, because he was rich and could turn it to better account than anybody I knew; but, prisoner and absolutely powerless though you are, I consider you a hundred times as strong as Kesselbach with his hundred millions."
"In that case, speak; and let us take things in their proper order.
The name of the murderer?"
"That's impossible."
"How do you mean, impossible?
I thought you knew it and were going to tell me everything!"
"Everything, but not that."
"But ..."
"Later on."
"You're mad!
Why?"
"I have no proofs.
Later, when you are free, we will hunt together.
Besides, what's the good?
And then, really, I can't tell you."
"You're afraid of him?"
"Yes."
"Very well," said Lupin.
"After all, that's not the most urgent matter.
As to the rest, you've made up your mind to speak?"
"Without reserve."
"Well, then, answer.
Who is Pierre Leduc?"
"Hermann IV., Grand Duke of Zweibrucken-Veldenz, Prince of Berncastel, Count of Fistingen, Lord of Wiesbaden and other places."
Lupin felt a thrill of joy at learning that his prot&#233;g&#233; was definitely not the son of a pork-butcher!
"The devil!"
he muttered.
"So we have a handle to our name!
... As far as I remember, the Grand-duchy of Zweibrucken-Veldenz is in Prussia?"
"Yes, on the Moselle. The house of Veldenz is a branch of the Palatine house of Zweibrucken. The grand-duchy was occupied by the French after the peace of Luneville and formed part of the department of Mont-Tonnerre.
In 1814, it was restored in favor of Hermann I., the great grandfather of Pierre Leduc.
His son, Hermann II.,
spent a riotous youth, ruined himself, squandered the finances of his country and made himself impossible to his subjects, who ended by partly burning the old castle at Veldenz and driving their sovereign out of his dominions.
The grand-duchy was then administered and governed by three regents, in the name of Hermann II.,
who, by a curious anomaly, did not abdicate, but retained his title as reigning grand-duke.
He lived, rather short of cash, in Berlin; later, he fought in the French war, by the side of Bismarck, of whom he was a friend.
He was killed by a shell at the siege of Paris and, in dying, entrusted Bismarck with the charge of his son Hermann, that is, Hermann III."
"The father, therefore, of our Leduc," said Lupin.
"Yes. The chancellor took a liking to Hermann III., and used often to employ him as a secret envoy to persons of distinction abroad. At the fall of his patron Hermann III., left Berlin, travelled about and returned and settled in Dresden. When Bismarck died, Hermann III., was there.
He himself died two years later.
These are public facts, known to everybody in Germany; and that is the story of the three Hermanns, Grand-dukes of Zweibrucken-Veldenz in the nineteenth century."
"But the fourth, Hermann IV., the one in whom we are interested?"
"We will speak of him presently.
Let us now pass on to unknown facts."
"Facts known to you alone," said Lupin.
"To me alone and to a few others."
"How do you mean, a few others?
Hasn't the secret been kept?"
"Yes, yes, the secret has been well kept by all who know it.
Have no fear; it is very much to their interest, I assure you, not to divulge it."
"Then how do you know it?"
"Through an old servant and private secretary of the Grand-duke Hermann, the last of the name. This servant, who died in my arms in South Africa, began by confiding to me that his master was secretly married and had left a son behind him.
Then he told me the great secret."
"The one which you afterwards revealed to Kesselbach."
"Yes."
"One second ... Will you excuse me?
..."
Lupin bent over M. Formerie, satisfied himself that all was well and the heart beating normally, and said:
"Go on."
Steinweg resumed:
"On the evening of the day on which Bismarck died, the Grand-duke Hermann III. and his faithful manservant &#8212; my South African friend &#8212; took a train which brought them to Munich in time to catch the express for Vienna.
From Vienna, they went to Constantinople, then to Cairo, then to Naples, then to Tunis, then to Spain, then to Paris, then to London, to St. Petersburg, to Warsaw ... and in none of these towns did they stop.
They took a cab, had their two bags put on the top, rushed through the streets, hurried to another station or to the landing-stage, and once more took the train or the steamer."
"In short, they were being followed and were trying to put their pursuers off the scent," Ars&#232;ne Lupin concluded.
"One evening, they left the city of Treves, dressed in workmen's caps and linen jackets, each with a bundle slung over his shoulder at the end of a stick.
They covered on foot the twenty-two miles to Veldenz, where the old Castle of Zweibrucken stands, or rather the ruins of the old castle."
"No descriptions, please."
"All day long, they remained hidden in a neighboring forest. At night, they went up to the old walls. Hermann ordered his servant to wait for him and himself scaled the wall at a breach known as the Wolf's Gap. He returned in an hour's time.
In the following week, after more peregrinations, he went back home to Dresden.
The expedition was over."
"And what was the object of the expedition?"
"The grand-duke never breathed a word about it to his servant.
But certain particulars and the coincidence of facts that ensued enabled the man to build up the truth, at least, in part."
"Quick, Steinweg, time is running short now: and I am eager to know."
"A fortnight after the expedition, Count von Waldemar, an officer in the Emperor's body-guard and one of his personal friends, called on the grand-duke, accompanied by six men. He was there all day, locked up with the grand-duke in his study. There were repeated sounds of altercations, of violent disputes.
One phrase even was overheard by the servant, who was passing through the garden, under the windows: 'Those papers were handed to you; His imperial Majesty is sure of it.
If you refuse to give them to me of your own free will ...' The rest of the sentence, the meaning of the threat and, for that matter, the whole scene can be easily guessed by what followed; Hermann's house was ransacked from top to bottom."
"But that is against the law."
"It would have been against the law if the grand-duke had objected; but he himself accompanied the count in his search."
"And what were they looking for?
The chancellor's memoirs?"
"Something better than that.
They were looking for a parcel of secret documents which were known to exist, owing to indiscretions that had been committed, and which were known for certain to have been entrusted to the Grand-duke Hermann's keeping."
Lupin muttered, excitedly:
"Secret documents ... and very important ones, no doubt?"
"Of the highest importance.
The publication of those papers would lead to results which it would be impossible to foresee, not only from the point of view of home politics, but also from that of Germany's relations with the foreign powers."
"Oh!"
said Lupin, throbbing with emotion.
"Oh, can it be possible?
What proof have you?"
"What proof?
The evidence of the grand-duke's wife, the confidences which she made to the servant after her husband's death."
"Yes ... yes ..." stammered Lupin.
"We have the evidence of the grand-duke himself."
"Better still," said Steinweg.
"What?"
"A document, a document written in his own hand, signed by him and containing ..."
"Containing what?"
"A list of the secret papers confided to his charge."
"Tell me, in two words..."
"In two words? That can't be done. The document is a very long one, scattered all over with annotations and remarks which are sometimes impossible to understand.
Let me mention just two titles which obviously refer to two bundles of secret papers: Original letters of the Crown Prince to Bismarck is one.
The dates show that these letters were written during the three months of the reign of Frederick III.
To picture what the letters may contain, you have only to think of the Emperor Frederick's illness, his quarrels with his son ..."
"Yes, yes, I know... And the other title?"
"Photographs of the letters of Frederick III., and the Empress Victoria to the Queen of England."
"Do you mean to say that that's there?"
asked Lupin, in a choking voice.
"Listen to the grand-duke's notes: Text of the treaty with Great Britain and France.
And these rather obscure words: 'Alsace-Lorraine... Colonies...
Limitation of naval armaments..."
"It says that?"
blurted Lupin.
"And you call that obscure?
... Why, the words are dazzling with light!
... Oh, can it be possible?
... And what next, what next?"
As he spoke there was a noise at the door.
Some one was knocking.
"You can't come in," said Lupin.
"I am busy... Go on, Steinweg."
"But ..." said the old man, in a great state of alarm.
The door was shaken violently and Lupin recognized Weber's voice.
He shouted:
"A little patience, Weber.
I shall have done in five minutes."
He gripped the old man's arm and, in a tone of command:
"Be easy and go on with your story.
So, according to you, the expedition of the grand duke and his servant to Veldenz Castle had no other object than to hide those papers?"
"There can be no question about that."
"Very well.
But the grand-duke may have taken them away since."
"No, he did not leave Dresden until his death."
"But the grand-duke's enemies, the men who had everything to gain by recovering them and destroying them: can't they have tried to find out where the papers were?"
"They have tried."
"How do you know?"
"You can understand that I did not remain inactive and that my first care, after receiving those revelations, was to go to Veldenz and make inquiries for myself in the neighboring villages.
Well, I learnt that, on two separate occasions, the castle was invaded by a dozen men, who came from Berlin furnished with credentials to the regents."
"Well?"
"Well, they found nothing, for, since that time, the castle has been found closed to the public."
"But what prevents anybody from getting in?"
"A garrison of fifty soldiers, who keep watch day and night."
"Soldiers of the grand-duchy?"
"No, soldiers drafted from the Emperor's own body-guard."
The din in the passage increased:
"Open the door!"
a voice cried.
"I order you to open the door!"
"I can't.
Weber, old chap; the lock has stuck.
If you take my advice, you had better cut the door all round the lock."
"Open the door!"
"And what about the fate of Europe, which we are discussing?"
He turned to the old man:
"So you were not able to enter the castle?"
"No."
"But you are persuaded that the papers in question are hidden there?"
"Look here, haven't I given you proofs enough?
Aren't you convinced?"
"Yes, yes," muttered Lupin, "that's where they are hidden ... there's no doubt about it ... that's where they are hidden..."
He seemed to see the castle. He seemed to conjure up the mysterious hiding-place.
And the vision of an inexhaustible treasure, the dream of chests filled with riches and precious stones could not have excited him more than the idea of those few scraps of paper watched over by the Kaiser's guards.
What a wonderful conquest to embark upon!
And how worthy of his powers!
And what a proof of perspicacity and intuition he had once more given by throwing himself at a venture upon that unknown track!
Outside, the men were "working" at the lock.
Lupin asked of old Steinweg:
"What did the grand-duke die of?"
"An attack of pleurisy, which carried him off in a few days. He hardly recovered consciousness before the end; and the horrible thing appears to have been that he was seen to make violent efforts, between his fits of delirium, to collect his thoughts and utter connected words.
From time to time, he called his wife, looked at her in a desperate way and vainly moved his lips."
"In a word, he spoke?"
said Lupin, cutting him short, for the "working" at the lock was beginning to make him anxious.
"No, he did not speak.
But, in a comparatively lucid moment, he summoned up the energy to make some marks on a piece of paper which his wife gave him."
"Well, those marks ...
?"
"They were illegible, for the most part."
"For the most part?
But the others?"
asked Lupin, greedily.
"The others?"
"There were, first, three perfectly distinct figures: an 8, a 1, and a 3..."
"Yes, 813, I know ... and next?"
"And next, there were some letters ... several letters, of which all that can be made out for certain are a group of three followed, immediately after, by a group of two letters."
"'APO ON,' is that it?"
"Oh, so you know!
..."
The lock was yielding; almost all the screws had been taken out.
Lupin, suddenly alarmed at the thought of being interrupted, asked:
"So that this incomplete word 'APO ON' and the number 813 are the formulas which the grand-duke bequeathed to his wife and son to enable them to find the secret papers?"
"Yes."
"What became of the grand-duke's wife?"
"She died soon after her husband, of grief, one might say."
"And was the child looked after by the family?"
"What family? The grand-duke had no brothers or sisters. Moreover, he was only morganatically and secretly married. No, the child was taken away by Hermann's old man-servant, who brought him up under the name of Pierre Leduc. He was a bad type of boy, self-willed, capricious and troublesome.
One day, he went off and was never seen again."
"Did he know the secret of his birth?"
"Yes; and he was shown the sheet of paper on which Hermann III.
had written the letters and figures."
"And after that this revelation was made to no one but yourself?"
"That's all."
"And you confided only in Mr.
Kesselbach?"
"Yes.
But, out of prudence, while showing him the sheet of letters and figures and the list of which I spoke to you, I kept both those documents in my own possession.
Events have proved that I was right."
Lupin was now clinging to the door with both hands:
"Weber," he roared, "you're very indiscreet!
I shall report you!
... Steinweg, have you those documents?"
"Yes."
"Are they in a safe place?"
"Absolutely."
"In Paris?"
"No."
"So much the better.
Don't forget that your life is in danger and that you have people after you."
"I know.
The least false step and I am done for."
"Exactly.
So take your precautions, throw the enemy off the scent, go and fetch your papers and await my instructions.
The thing is cut and dried.
In a month, at latest, we will go to Veldenz Castle together."
"Suppose I'm in prison?"
"I will take you out."
"Can you?"
"The very day after I come out myself.
No, I'm wrong: the same evening ... an hour later."
"You have the means?"
"Since the last ten minutes, an infallible means.
You have nothing more to say to me?"
"No."
"Then I'll open the door."
He pulled back the door, and bowing to M. Weber:
"My poor old Weber, I don't know what excuse to make ..."
He did not finish his sentence.
The sudden inrush of the deputy-chief and three policeman left him no time.
M. Weber was white with rage and indignation.
The sight of the two men lying outstretched quite unsettled him.
"Dead!"
he exclaimed.
"Not a bit of it, not a bit of it," chuckled Lupin, "only asleep!
Formerie was tired out ... so I allowed him a few moments' rest."
"Enough of this humbug!"
shouted M. Weber.
And, turning to the policemen, "Take him back to the Santé.
And keep your eyes open, damn it!
As for this visitor ..."
Lupin learnt nothing more as to Weber's intentions with regard to old Steinweg.
A crowd of municipal guards and police constables hustled him down to the prison-van.
On the stairs Doudeville whispered:
"Weber had a line to warn him.
It told him to mind the confrontation and to be on his guard with Steinweg.
The note was signed 'L.
M.'"
But Lupin hardly bothered his head about all this.
What did he care for the murderer's hatred or old Steinweg's fate?
He possessed Rudolf Kesselbach's secret!
Contrary to his expectations, Lupin had no sort of annoyance to undergo in consequence of his assault on M. Formerie.
The examining-magistrate came to the Santé in person, two days later, and told him, with some embarrassment and with an affectation of kindness, that he did not intend to pursue the matter further.
"Nor I, either," retorted Lupin.
"What do you mean?"
"Well, I mean that I shall send no communication to the press about this particular matter nor do anything that might expose you to ridicule, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction.
The scandal shall not be made public, I promise.
That is what you want, is it not?"
M. Formerie blushed and, without replying, continued:
"Only, henceforth, your examinations will take place here."
"It's quite right that the law should put itself out for Lupin!"
said that gentleman.
The announcement of this decision, which interrupted his almost daily meetings with the Doudevilles, did not disturb Lupin.
He had taken his precautions from the first day, by giving the Doudevilles all the necessary instructions and, now that the preparations were nearly completed, reckoned upon being able to turn old Steinweg's confidences to the best account without delay and to obtain his liberty by one of the most extraordinary and ingenious schemes that had ever entered his brain.
His method of correspondence was a simple one; and he had devised it at once. Every morning he was supplied with sheets of paper in numbered packets. He made these into envelopes; and, every evening, the envelopes, duly folded and gummed, were fetched away.
Now Lupin, noticing that his packet always bore the same number, had drawn the inference that the distribution of the numbered packets was always affected in the same order among the prisoners who had chosen that particular kind of work.
Experience showed that he was right.
It only remained for the Doudevilles to bribe one of the employees of the private firm entrusted with the supply and dispatch of the envelopes.
This was easily done; and, thenceforward, Lupin, sure of success, had only to wait quietly until the sign agreed upon between him and his friends appeared upon the top sheet of the packet.
On the sixth day, he gave an exclamation of delight:
"At last!"
he said.
He took a tiny bottle from a hiding-place, uncorked it, moistened the tip of his forefinger with the liquid which it contained and passed his finger over the third sheet in the packet.
In a moment, strokes appeared, then letters, then words and sentences.
He read:
"All well.
Steinweg free.
Hiding in country.
Geneviève Ernemont good health.
Often goes Hôtel Bristol to see Mrs. Kesselbach, who is ill.
Meets Pierre Leduc there every time.
Answer by same means.
No danger."
So communications were established with the outside.
Once more, Lupin's efforts were crowned with success.
All that he had to do now was to execute his plan and lead the press campaign which he had prepared in the peaceful solitude of his prison.
Three days later, these few lines appeared in the Grand Journal:
"Quite apart from Prince Bismarck's Memoirs, which, according to well-informed people, contain merely the official history of the events in which the great chancellor was concerned, there exists a series of confidential letters of no little interest.
"These letters have been recently discovered.
We hear, on good authority, that they will be published almost immediately."
My readers will remember the noise which these mysterious sentences made throughout the civilized world, the comments in which people indulged, the suggestions put forward and, in particular, the controversy that followed in the German press. Who had inspired those lines? What were the letters in question?
Who had written them to the chancellor or who had received them from him?
Was it an act of posthumous revenge?
Or was it an indiscretion committed by one of Bismarck's correspondents?
A second note settled public opinion as to certain points, but, at the same time, worked it up to a strange pitch of excitement.
It ran as follows:
"To the Editor of the Grand Journal,
"Santé Palace,
"Cell 14, Second Division.
"Sir,
"You inserted in your issue of Tuesday last a paragraph based upon a few words which I let fall, the other evening, in the course of a lecture, which I was delivering at the Santé on foreign politics.
Your correspondent's paragraph, although accurate in all essential particulars, requires a slight correction.
The letters exist, as stated, and it is impossible to deny their exceptional importance, seeing that, for ten years, they have been the object of an uninterrupted search on the part of the government interested.
But nobody knows where they are hidden and nobody knows a single word of what they contain.
"The public, I am convinced, will bear me no ill-will if I keep it waiting for some time before satisfying its legitimate curiosity.
Apart from the fact that I am not in possession of all the elements necessary for the pursuit of the truth, my present occupation does not allow me to devote so much time as I could wish to this matter.
"All that I can say for the moment is that the letters were entrusted by the dying statesman to one of his most faithful friends and that this friend had eventually to suffer the serious consequences of his loyalty.
Constant spying, domiciliary visits, nothing was spared him.
"I have given orders to two of the best agents of my secret police to take up this scent from the start in a position to get to the bottom of this exciting mystery.
"I have the honor to be Sir,
"Your obedient servant,
"Arsène Lupin."
So it was Arsène Lupin who was conducting the case! It was he who, from his prison cell, was stage-managing the comedy or the tragedy announced in the first note. What luck! Everybody was delighted.
With an artist like Lupin, the spectacle could not fail to be both picturesque and startling.
Three days later the Grand Journal contained the following letter from Arsène Lupin:
"The name of the devoted friend to whom I referred has been imparted to me.
It was the Grand-Duke Hermann III., reigning (although dispossessed) sovereign of the Grand-duchy of Zweibrucken-Veldenz and a confidant of Prince Bismarck, whose entire friendship he enjoyed.
"A thorough search was made of his house by Count von W - - , at the head of twelve men.
The result of this search was purely negative, but the grand-duke was nevertheless proved to be in possession of the papers.
"Where had he hidden them?
This was a problem which probably nobody in the world would be able to solve at the present moment.
"I must ask for twenty-four hours in which to solve it.
"Arsène Lupin."
And, twenty-four hours later, the promised note appeared:
"The famous letters are hidden in the feudal castle of Veldenz, the capital of the Grand-duchy of Zweibrucken.
The castle was partly destroyed in the course of the nineteenth century.
"Where exactly are they hidden?
And what are the letters precisely?
These are the two problems which I am now engaged in unravelling; and I shall publish the solution in four days' time.
"Arsène Lupin."
On the day stated, men scrambled to obtain copies of the Grand Journal.
To the general disappointment, the promised information was not given.
The same silence followed on the next day and the day after.
What had happened?
It leaked out through an indiscretion at the Prefecture of Police. The governor of the Santé, it appeared, had been warned that Lupin was communicating with his accomplices by means of the packets of envelopes which he made.
Nothing had been discovered; but it was thought best, in any case, to forbid all work to the insufferable prisoner.
To this the insufferable prisoner replied:
"As I have nothing to do now, I may as well attend to my trial.
Please let my counsel, Maître Quimbel, know."
It was true.
Lupin, who, hitherto, had refused to hold any intercourse with Maître Quimbel, now consented to see him and to prepare his defence.
On the next day Maître Quimbel, in cheery tones, asked for Lupin to be brought to the barristers' room. He was an elderly man, wearing a pair of very powerful spectacles, which made his eyes seem enormous.
He put his hat on the table, spread out his brief-case and at once began to put a series of questions which he had carefully prepared.
Lupin replied with extreme readiness and even volunteered a host of particulars, which Maître Quimbel took down, as he spoke, on slips pinned one to the other.
"And so you say," continued the barrister, with his head over his papers, "that, at that time ..."
"I say that, at that time ..." Lupin answered.
Little by little, with a series of natural and hardly perceptible movements, he leant elbows on the table.
He gradually lowered his arms, slipped his hand under Maître Quimbel's hat, put his finger into the leather band and took out one of those strips of paper, folded lengthwise, which the hatter inserts between the leather and the lining when the hat is a trifle too large.
He unfolded the paper.
It was a message from Doudeville, written in a cipher agreed upon beforehand:
"I am engaged as indoor servant at Maître Quimbel's.
You can answer by the same means without fear.
"It was L. M., the murderer, who gave away the envelope trick.
A good thing that you foresaw this move!"
Hereupon followed a minute report of all the facts and comments caused by Lupin's revelations.
Lupin took from his pocket a similar strip of paper containing his instructions, quietly substituted it in the place of the other and drew his hand back again.
The trick was played.
And Lupin's correspondence with the Grand Journal was resumed without further delay.
"I apologize to the public for not keeping my promise.
The postal arrangements at the Santé Palace are woefully inadequate.
"However, we are near the end. I have in hand all the documents that establish the truth upon an indisputable basis. I shall not publish them for the moment.
Nevertheless, I will say this: among the letters are some that were addressed to the chancellor by one who, at that time, declared himself his disciple and his admirer and who was destined, several years after, to rid himself of that irksome tutor and to govern alone.
"I trust that I make myself sufficiently clear."
And, on the next day:
"The letters were written during the late Emperor's illness.
I need hardly add more to prove their importance."
Four days of silence, and then this final note, which caused a stir that has not yet been forgotten:
"My investigation is finished.
I now know everything.
"By dint of reflection, I have guessed the secret of the hiding-place.
"My friends are going to Veldenz and, in spite of every obstacle, will enter the castle by a way which I am pointing out to them.
"The newspapers will then publish photographs of the letters, of which I already know the tenor; but I prefer to reproduce the whole text.
"This certain, inevitable publication will take place in a fortnight from to-day precisely, on the 22nd of August next.
"Between this and then I will keep silence ... and wait."
The communications to the Grand Journal did, in fact, stop for a time, but Lupin never ceased corresponding with his friends, "via the hat," as they said among themselves.
It was so simple!
There was no danger.
Who could ever suspect that Maître Quimbel's hat served Lupin as a letter-box?
Every two or three mornings, whenever he called, in fact, the celebrated advocate faithfully brought his client's letters: letters from Paris, letters from the country, letters from Germany; all reduced and condensed by Doudeville into a brief form and cipher language.
And, an hour later, Maître Quimbel solemnly walked away, carrying Lupin's orders.
Now, one day, the governor of the Santé received a telephone message, signed, "L. M.," informing him that Maître Quimbel was, in all probability, serving Lupin as his unwitting postman and that it would be advisable to keep an eye upon the worthy man's visits.
The governor told Maître Quimbel, who thereupon resolved to bring his junior with him.
So, once again, in spite of all Lupin's efforts, in spite of his fertile powers of invention, in spite of the marvels of ingenuity which he renewed after each defeat, once again Lupin found himself cut off from communication with the outside world by the infernal genius of his formidable adversary.
And he found himself thus cut off at the most critical moment, at the solemn minute when, from his cell, he was playing his last trump-card against the coalesced forces that were overwhelming him so terribly.
On the 13th of August, as he sat facing the two counsels, his attention was attracted by a newspaper in which some of Maître Quimbel's papers were wrapped up.
He saw a heading in very large type
"813"
The sub-headings were:
"A FRESH MURDER
"THE EXCITEMENT IN GERMANY
"HAS THE SECRET OF THE 'APOON' BEEN DISCOVERED?"
Lupin turned pale with anguish.
Below he read the words:
"Two sensational telegrams reach us at the moment of going to press.
"The body of an old man has been found near Augsburg, with his throat cut with a knife.
The police have succeeded in identifying the victim: it is Steinweg, the man mentioned in the Kesselbach case.
"On the other hand, a correspondent telegraphs that the famous English detective, Holmlock Shears, has been hurriedly summoned to Cologne.
He will there meet the Emperor; and they will both proceed to Veldenz Castle.
"Holmlock Shears is said to have undertaken to discover the secret of the 'APOON.'
"If he succeeds, it will mean the pitiful failure of the incomprehensible campaign which Arsène Lupin has been conducting for the past month in so strange a fashion."
Perhaps public curiosity was never so much stirred as by the duel announced to take place between Shears and Lupin, an invisible duel in the circumstances, an anonymous duel, one might say, in which everything would happen in the dark, in which people would be able to judge only by the final results, and yet an impressive duel, because of all the scandal that circled around the adventure and because of the stakes in dispute between the two irreconcilable enemies, now once more opposed to each other.
And it was a question not of small private interests, of insignificant burglaries, of trumpery individual passions, but of a matter of really world-wide importance, involving the politics of the three great western nations and capable of disturbing the peace of the world.
People waited anxiously; and no one knew exactly what he was waiting for.
For, after all, if the detective came out victorious in the duel, if he found the letters, who would ever know?
What proof would any one have of his triumph?
In the main, all hopes were centred on Lupin, on his well-known habit of calling the public to witness his acts.
What was he going to do?
How could he avert the frightful danger that threatened him?
Was he even aware of it?
Those were the questions which men asked themselves.
Between the four walls of his cell, prisoner 14 asked himself pretty nearly the same questions; and he for his part, was not stimulated by idle curiosity, but by real uneasiness, by constant anxiety. He felt himself irrevocably alone, with impotent hands, an impotent will, an impotent brain.
It availed him nothing that he was able, ingenious, fearless, heroic.
The struggle was being carried on without him.
His part was now finished.
He had joined all the pieces and set all the springs of the great machine that was to produce, that was, in a manner of speaking, automatically to manufacture his liberty; and it was impossible for him to make a single movement to improve and supervise his handiwork.
At the date fixed, the machine would start working.
Between now and then, a thousand adverse incidents might spring up, a thousand obstacles arise, without his having the means to combat those incidents or remove those obstacles.
Lupin spent the unhappiest hours of his life at that time. He doubted himself. He wondered whether his existence would be buried for good in the horror of a jail. Had he not made a mistake in his calculations?
Was it not childish to believe that the event that was to set him free would happen on the appointed date?
"Madness!"
he cried.
"My argument is false... How can I expect such a concurrence of circumstances?
There will be some little fact that will destroy all ... the inevitable grain of sand..."
Steinweg's death and the disappearance of the documents which the old man was to make over to him did not trouble him greatly.
The documents he could have done without in case of need; and, with the few words which Steinweg had told him, he was able, by dint of guess-work and his native genius, to reconstruct what the Emperor's letters contained and to draw up the plan of battle that would lead to victory.
But he thought of Holmlock Shears, who was over there now, in the very centre of the battlefield, and who was seeking and who would find the letters, thus demolishing the edifice so patiently built up.
And he thought of "the other one," the implacable enemy, lurking round the prison, hidden in the prison, perhaps, who guessed his most secret plans even before they were hatched in the mystery of his thought.
The 17th of August!
...
The 18th of August!
...
The 19th!
... Two more days... Two centuries rather!
Oh, the interminable minutes!
...
Lupin, usually so calm, so entirely master of himself, so ingenious at providing matter for his own amusement, was feverish, exultant and depressed by turns, powerless against the enemy, mistrusting everything and everybody, morose.
The 20th of August!
...
He would have wished to act and he could not. Whatever he did, it was impossible for him to hasten the hour of the catastrophe.
This catastrophe would take place or would not take place; but Lupin would not know for certain until the last hour of the last day was spent to the last minute.
Then &#8212; and then alone &#8212; he would know of the definite failure of his scheme.
"The inevitable failure," he kept on repeating to himself.
"Success depends upon circumstances far too subtle and can be obtained only by methods far too psychological...
There is no doubt that I am deceiving myself as to the value and the range of my weapons... And yet ..."
Hope returned to him.
He weighed his chances.
They suddenly seemed to him real and formidable.
The fact was going to happen as he had foreseen it happening and for the very reasons which he had expected.
It was inevitable...
Yes, inevitable.
Unless, indeed, Shears discovered the hiding-place...
And again he thought of Shears; and again an immense sense of discouragement overwhelmed him.
The last day...
He woke late, after a night of bad dreams.
He saw nobody that day, neither the examining magistrate nor his counsel.
The afternoon dragged along slowly and dismally, and the evening came, the murky evening of the cells...
He was in a fever.
His heart beat in his chest like the clapper of a bell.
And the minutes passed, irretrievably...
At nine o'clock, nothing.
At ten o'clock, nothing.
With all his nerves tense as the string of a bow, he listened to the vague prison sounds, tried to catch through those inexorable walls all that might trickle in from the life outside.
Oh, how he would have liked to stay the march of time and to give destiny a little more leisure!
But what was the good?
Was everything not finished?
...
"Oh," he cried, "I am going mad!
If all this were only over ... that would be better.
I can begin again, differently...
I shall try something else ... but I can't go on like this, I can't go on..."
He held his head in his hands, pressing it with all his might, locking himself within himself and concentrating his whole mind upon one subject, as though he wished to provoke, as though he wished to create the formidable, stupefying, inadmissible event to which he had attached his independence and his fortune:
"It must happen," he muttered, "it must; and it must, not because I wish it, but because it is logical.
And it shall happen ... it shall happen..."
He beat his skull with his fists; and delirious words rose to his lips...
The key grated in the lock.
In his frenzy, he had not heard the sound of footsteps in the corridor; and now, suddenly, a ray of light penetrated into his cell and the door opened.
Three men entered.
Lupin had not a moment of surprise.
The unheard-of miracle was being worked; and this at once seemed to him natural and normal, in perfect agreement with truth and justice.
But a rush of pride flooded his whole being.
At this minute he really received a clear sensation of his own strength and intelligence...
"Shall I switch on the light?"
asked one of the three men, in whom Lupin recognized the governor of the prison.
"No," replied the taller of his companions, speaking in a foreign accent.
"This lantern will do."
"Shall I go?"
"Act according to your duty, sir," said the same individual.
"My instructions from the prefect of police are to comply entirely with your wishes."
"In that case, sir, it would be preferable that you should withdraw."
M. Bor&#233;ly went away, leaving the door half open, and remained outside, within call.
The visitor exchanged a few words with the one who had not yet spoken; and Lupin vainly tried to distinguish his features in the shade.
He saw only two dark forms, clad in wide motoring-cloaks and wearing caps with the flaps lowered.
"Are you Ars&#232;ne Lupin?"
asked the man, turning the light of the lantern full on his face.
He smiled:
"Yes, I am the person known as Ars&#232;ne Lupin, at present a prisoner in the Sant&#233;, cell 14, second division."
"Was it you," continued the visitor, "who published in the Grand Journal a series of more or less fanciful notes, in which there is a question of a so-called collection of letters ...
?"
Lupin interrupted him.
"I beg your pardon, sir, but, before pursuing this conversation, the object of which, between ourselves, is none too clear to me, I should be much obliged if you would tell me to whom I have the honour of speaking."
"Absolutely unnecessary," replied the stranger.
"Absolutely essential," declared Lupin.
"Why?"
"For reasons of politeness, sir.
You know my name and I do not know yours; this implies a disregard of good form which I cannot suffer."
The stranger lost patience:
"The mere fact that the governor of the prison brought us here shows ..."
"That M. Bor&#233;ly does not know his manners," said Lupin. "M. Bor&#233;ly should have introduced us to each other. We are equals here, sir: it is no case of a superior and an inferior, of a prisoner and a visitor who condescends to come and see him.
There are two men here; and one of those two men has a hat on his head, which he ought not to have."
"Now look here ..."
"Take the lesson as you please, sir," said Lupin.
The stranger came closer to him and tried to speak.
"The hat first," said Lupin, "the hat..."
"You shall listen to me!"
"No."
"Yes."
"No."
Matters were becoming virulent, stupidly.
The second stranger, the one who had kept silent, placed his hand on his companion's shoulder and said, in German:
"Leave him to me."
"Why, it was understood ..."
"Hush ... and go away!"
"Leaving you alone?"
"Yes."
"But the door?"
"Shut it and walk away."
"But this man ... you know who he is... Ars&#232;ne Lupin..."
"Go away!"
The other went out, cursing under his breath.
"Pull the door!"
cried the second visitor.
"Harder than that...
Altogether!
... That's right..."
Then he turned, took the lantern and raised it slowly:
"Shall I tell you who I am?"
he asked.
"No," replied Lupin.
"And why?"
"Because I know."
"Ah!"
"You are the visitor I was expecting."
"I?"
"Yes, Sire."
"Silence!"
said the stranger, sharply.
"Don't use that word."
"Then what shall I call Your ..."
"Call me nothing."
They were both silent; and this moment of respite was not one of those which go before the struggle of two adversaries ready for the fray. The stranger strode to and fro with the air of a master accustomed to command and to be obeyed. Lupin stood motionless.
He had abandoned his usual provocative attitude and his sarcastic smile.
He waited, gravely and deferentially.
But, down in the depths of his being, he revelled, eagerly, madly, in the marvellous situation in which he found himself placed: here, in his cell, he, a prisoner; he, the adventurer; he, the swindler, the burglar; he, Arsène Lupin ... face to face with that demi-god of the modern world, that formidable entity, the heir of Caesar and of Charlemagne.
He was intoxicated for a moment with the sense of his own power.
The tears came to his eyes when he thought of his triumph...
The stranger stood still.
And at once, with the very first sentence, they came to the immediate point:
"To-morrow is the 22nd of August.
The letters are to be published to-morrow, are they not?"
"To-night, in two hours from now, my friends are to hand in to the Grand Journal, not the letters themselves, but an exact list of the letters, with the Grand-duke Hermann's annotations."
"That list shall not be handed in."
"It shall not be."
"You will give it to me."
"It shall be placed in the hands of Your ... in your hands."
"Likewise, all the letters?"
"Likewise, all the letters."
"Without any of them being photographed?"
"Without any of them being photographed."
The stranger spoke in a very calm voice, containing not the least accent of entreaty nor the least inflection of authority. He neither ordered nor requested; he stated the inevitable actions of Arsène Lupin. Things would happen as he said.
And they would happen, whatever Arsène Lupin's demands should be, at whatever price he might value the performance of those actions.
The conditions were accepted beforehand.
"By Jove," said Lupin to himself, "that's jolly clever of him!
If he leaves it to my generosity, I am a ruined man!"
The very way in which the conversation opened, the frankness of the words employed, the charm of voice and manner all pleased him infinitely.
He pulled himself together, lest he should relent and abandon all the advantages which he had conquered so fiercely.
And the stranger continued:
"Have you read the letters?"
"No."
"But some one you know has read them?"
"No."
"In that case ..."
"I have the grand-duke's list and his notes.
Moreover, I know the hiding-place where he put all his papers."
"Why did you not take them before this?"
"I did not know the secret of the hiding-place until I came here.
My friends are on the way there now."
"The castle is guarded.
It is occupied by two hundred of my most trusty men."
"Ten thousand would not be sufficient."
After a minute's reflection, the visitor asked:
"How do you know the secret?"
"I guessed it."
"But you had other elements of information which the papers did not publish?"
"No, none at all."
"And yet I had the castle searched for four days."
"Holmlock Shears looked in the wrong place."
"Ah!"
said the stranger to himself.
"It's an odd thing, an odd thing!
..." And, to Lupin, "You are sure that your supposition is correct?"
"It is not a supposition: it is a certainty."
"So much the better," muttered the visitor.
"There will be no rest until those papers cease to exist."
And, placing himself in front of Arsène Lupin:
"How much?"
"What?"
said Lupin, taken aback.
"How much for the papers?
How much do you ask to reveal the secret?"
He waited for Lupin to name a figure.
He suggested one himself:
"Fifty thousand?
... A hundred thousand?"
And, when Lupin did not reply, he said, with a little hesitation:
"More?
Two hundred thousand?
Very well!
I agree."
Lupin smiled and, in a low voice, said:
"It is a handsome figure.
But is it not likely that some sovereign, let us say, the King of England, would give as much as a million?
In all sincerity?"
"I believe so."
"And that those letters are priceless to the Emperor, that they are worth two million quite as easily as two hundred thousand francs ... three million as easily as two?"
"I think so."
"And, if necessary, the Emperor would give that three million francs?"
"Yes."
"Then it will not be difficult to come to an arrangement."
"On that basis?"
cried the stranger, not without some alarm.
Lupin smiled again:
"On that basis, no...
I am not looking for money.
I want something else, something that is worth more to me than any number of millions."
"What is that?"
"My liberty."
"What!
Your liberty...
But I can do nothing... That concerns your country ... the law...
I have no power."
Lupin went up to him and, lowering his voice still more:
"You have every power, Sire... My liberty is not such an exceptional event that they are likely to refuse you."
"Then I should have to ask for it?"
"Yes."
"Of whom?"
"Of Valenglay, the prime minister."
"But M. Valenglay himself can do no more than I."
"He can open the doors of this prison for me."
"It would cause a public outcry."
"When I say, open ... half-open would be enough ... We should counterfeit an escape...
The public so thoroughly expects it that it would not so much as ask for an explanation."
"Very well ... but M. Valenglay will never consent..."
"He will consent."
"Why?"
"Because you will express the wish."
"My wishes are not commands ... to him!"
"No ... but an opportunity of making himself agreeable to the Emperor by fulfilling them.
And Valenglay is too shrewd a politician..."
"Nonsense!
Do you imagine that the French government will commit so illegal an act for the sole pleasure of making itself agreeable to me?"
"That pleasure will not be the sole one."
"What will be the other?"
"The pleasure of serving France by accepting the proposal which will accompany the request for my release."
"I am to make a proposal?
I?"
"Yes, Sire."
"What proposal?"
"I do not know, but it seems to me that there is always a favorable ground on which to come to an understanding ... there are possibilities of agreement..."
The stranger looked at him, without grasping his meaning.
Lupin leant forward and, as though seeking his words, as though putting an imaginary case, said:
"Let me suppose that two great countries are divided by some insignificant question ... that they have different points of view on a matter of secondary importance ... a colonial matter, for instance, in which their self-esteem is at stake rather than their interest... Is it inconceivable that the ruler of one of those countries might come of his own accord to treat this matter in a new spirit of conciliation ... and give the necessary instructions ... so that ..."
"So that I might leave Morocco to France?"
said the stranger, with a burst of laughter.
The idea which Lupin was suggesting struck him as the most comical thing that he had ever heard; and he laughed heartily.
The disparity was so great between the object aimed at and the means proposed!
"Of course, of course!" he resumed, with a vain attempt to recover his seriousness. "Of course, it's a very original idea: the whole of modern politics upset so that Ars&#232;ne Lupin may be free! ... The plans of the Empire destroyed so that Ars&#232;ne Lupin may continue his exploits!
... Why not ask me for Alsace and Lorraine at once?"
"I did think of it, Sire," replied Lupin, calmly.
The stranger's merriment increased:
"Splendid!
And you let me off?"
"This time, yes."
Lupin had crossed his arms.
He, too, was amusing himself by exaggerating the part which he was playing; and he continued, with affected seriousness:
"A series of circumstances might one day arise which would put in my hands the power of demanding and obtaining that restitution. When that day comes, I shall certainly not fail to do so. For the moment, the weapons at my disposal oblige me to be more modest.
Peace in Morocco will satisfy me."
"Just that?"
"Just that."
"Morocco against your liberty!"
"Nothing more ... or, rather &#8212; for we must not lose sight entirely of the main object of this conversation &#8212; or, rather, a little good will on the part of one of the countries in question ... and, in exchange, the surrender of the letters which are in my power."
"Those letters, those letters!"
muttered the stranger irritably.
"After all, perhaps they are not so valuable..."
"There are some in your own hand, Sire; and you considered them valuable enough to come to this cell..."
"Well, what does it matter?"
"But there are others of which you do not know the authorship and about which I can give you a few particulars."
"Oh, indeed!"
said the stranger, rather anxiously.
Lupin hesitated.
"Speak, speak plainly," said the stranger.
"Say what you have in your mind."
In the profound silence of the cell, Lupin declared, with a certain solemnity:
"Twenty years ago a draft treaty was prepared between Germany, Great Britain, and France."
"That's not true!
It's impossible!
Who could have done such a thing?"
"The Emperor's father and the Queen of England, his grandmother, both acting under the influence of the Empress Frederick."
"Impossible!
I repeat, it is impossible!"
"The correspondence is in the hiding-place at Veldenz Castle; and I alone know the secret of the hiding-place."
The stranger walked up and down with an agitated step.
Then he stopped short:
"Is the text of the treaty included in that correspondence?"
"Yes, Sire.
It is in your father's own hand."
"And what does it say?"
"By that treaty, France and Great Britain granted and promised Germany an immense colonial empire, the empire which she does not at present possess and which has become a necessity to her, in these times, to ensure her greatness."
"And what did England demand as a set-off against that empire?"
"The limitation of the German fleet."
"And France?"
"Alsace and Lorraine."
The Emperor leant against the table in silent thought.
Lupin continued:
"Everything was ready. The cabinets of Paris and London had been sounded and had consented. The thing was practically done. The great treaty of alliance was on the point of being concluded. It would have laid the foundations of a definite and universal peace.
The death of your father destroyed that sublime dream.
But I ask Your Imperial Majesty, what will your people think, what will the world think, when it knows that Frederick III.,
one of the heroes of 1870, a German, a pure and loyal German, respected by all, generally admired for his nobility of character, agreed to the restitution of Alsace-Lorraine and therefore considered that restitution just?"
He was silent for an instant leaving the problem to fix itself in its precise terms before the Emperor's conscience, before his conscience as a man, a son and a sovereign.
Then he concluded:
"Your Imperial Majesty yourself must know whether you wish or do not wish history to record the existence of that treaty.
As for me, Sire, you can see that my humble personality counts for very little in the discussion."
A long pause followed upon Lupin's words. He waited, with his soul torn with anguish.
His whole destiny was at stake, in this minute which he had conceived and, in a manner, produced with such effort and such stubbornness, an historic minute, born of his brain, in which "his humble personality," for all that he might say, weighed heavily upon the fate of empires and the peace of the world.
Opposite him, in the shadow, Caesar stood meditating.
What answer would he make?
What solution would he give to the problem?
He walked across the cell for a few moments, which to Lupin seemed interminable.
Then he stopped and asked:
"Are there any other conditions?"
"Yes, Sire, but they are insignificant."
"Name them."
"I have found the son of the Grand-duke of Zweibrucken-Veldenz.
The grand-duchy must be restored to him."
"Anything else?"
"He loves a young girl, who loves him in her turn.
She is the fairest and the most virtuous of her sex.
He must marry her."
"Anything else?"
"That is all."
"There is nothing more?"
"Nothing.
Your majesty need only have this letter delivered to the editor of the Grand Journal, who will then destroy, unread, the article which he may now receive at any moment."
Lupin held out the letter, with a heavy heart and a trembling hand.
If the Emperor took it, that would be a sign of his acceptance.
The Emperor hesitated and then, with an abrupt movement, took the letter, put on his hat, wrapped his cloak round him and walked out without a word.
Lupin remained for a few seconds, staggering, as though dazed...
Then, suddenly, he fell into his chair, shouting with joy and pride...
"Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction, I am sorry to say good-bye to you to-day."
"Why, M. Lupin, are you thinking of leaving us?"
"With the greatest reluctance, I assure you, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction.
Our relations have been so very pleasant and cordial!
But all good things must come to an end.
My cure at the Sant&#233; Palace is finished.
Other duties call me.
I have resolved to make my escape to-night."
"Then I wish you good luck, M.
Lupin."
"A thousand thanks, M. le Juge d'Instruction."
Ars&#232;ne Lupin waited patiently for the hour of his escape, not without asking himself how it would be contrived and by what means France and Germany, uniting for the joint performance of this deserving work, would succeed in effecting it without creating too great a scandal.
Late in the afternoon, the warder told him to go to the entrance-yard.
He hurried out and was met by the governor, who handed him over to M. Weber.
M. Weber made him step into a motor-car in which somebody was already seated.
Lupin had a violent fit of laughter:
"What, you, my poor old Weber! Have they let you in for this tiresome job? Are you to be responsible for my escape? Upon my word, you are an unlucky beggar! Oh, my poor old chap, what hard lines!
First made famous through my arrest, you are now to become immortal through my escape!"
He looked at the other man:
"Well, well, Monsieur le Pr&#233;fet de Police, so you are in the business too! That's a nasty thing for you, what? If you take my advice, you'll stay in the background and leave the honor and glory to Weber! It's his by right!
... And he can stand a lot, the rascal!"
The car travelled at a fast pace, along the Seine and through Boulogne.
At Saint-Cloud, they crossed the river.
"Splendid!"
cried Lupin.
"We're going to Garches!
You want me there, in order to re&#235;nact the death of Altenheim.
We shall go down into the underground passage, I shall disappear and people will say that I got through another outlet, known to myself alone!
Lord, how idiotic!"
He seemed quite unhappy about it:
"Idiotic! Idiotic in the highest degree! I blush for shame! ... And those are the people who govern us! ... What an age to live in! ... But, you poor devils, why didn't you come to me?
I'd have invented a beautiful little escape for you, something of a miraculous nature.
I had it all ready pigeon-holed in my mind!
The public would have yelled with wonder and danced with delight.
Instead of which ...
However, it's quite true that you were given rather short notice ... but all the same ..."
The programme was exactly as Lupin had foreseen.
They walked through the grounds of the House of Retreat to the Pavillon Hortense.
Lupin and his two companions went down the stairs and along the underground passage.
At the end of the tunnel, the deputy-chief said:
"You are free."
"And there you are!"
said Lupin.
"Is that all?
Well, my dear Weber, thank you very much and sorry to have given you so much trouble.
Good-bye, Monsieur le Pr&#233;fet; kind regards to the missus!"
He climbed the stairs that led to the Villa des Glycines, raised the trap-door and sprang into the room.
A hand fell on his shoulder.
Opposite him stood his first visitor of the day before, the one who had accompanied the Emperor.
There were four men with him, two on either side.
"Look here," said Lupin, "what's the meaning of this joke?
I thought I was free!"
"Yes, yes," growled the German, in his rough voice, "you are free ... free to travel with the five of us ... if that suits you."
Lupin looked at him, for a second, with a mad longing to hit him on the nose, just to teach him. But the five men looked devilish determined.
Their leader did not betray any exaggerated fondness for him; and it seemed to him that the fellow would be only too pleased to resort to extreme measures.
Besides, after all, what did he care?
He chuckled:
"If it suits me?
Why, it's the dream of my life!"
A powerful covered car was waiting in the paved yard outside the villa.
Two men got into the driver's seat, two others inside, with their backs to the motor.
Lupin and the stranger sat down on the front seat.
"Vorwarts!"
cried Lupin, in German.
"Vorwarts nach Veldenz!"
The stranger said:
"Silence!
Those men must know nothing.
Speak French.
They don't know French.
But why speak at all?"
"Quite right," said Lupin to himself.
"Why speak at all?"
The car travelled all the evening and all night, without any incident.
Twice they stopped to take in petrol at some sleepy little town.
The Germans took it in turns to watch their prisoner, who did not open his eyes until the early morning.
They stopped for breakfast at an inn on a hillside, near which stood a sign-post.
Lupin saw that they were at an equal distance from Metz and Luxemburg.
From there, they took a road that slanted north-east, in the direction of Treves.
Lupin said to his travelling-companion:
"Am I right in believing that I have the honor of speaking to Count von Waldemar, the Emperor's confidential friend, the one who searched Hermann III.
's house in Dresden?"
The stranger remained silent.
"You're the sort of chap I can't stand at any price," muttered Lupin. "I'll have some fun with you, one of these days. You're ugly, you're fat, you're heavy; in short, I don't like you." And he added, aloud, "You are wrong not to answer me, Monsieur le Comte.
I was speaking in your own interest: just as we were stepping in, I saw a motor come into sight, behind us, on the horizon.
Did you see it?"
"No, why?"
"Nothing."
"Still..."
"No, nothing at all ... a mere remark...
Besides, we are ten minutes ahead ... and our car is at least a forty-horse-power."
"It's a sixty," said the German, looking at him uneasily from the corner of his eye.
"Oh, then we're all right!"
They were climbing a little slope.
When they reached the top, the count leant out of the window:
"Damn it all!"
he swore.
"What's the matter?"
asked Lupin.
The count turned to him and, in a threatening voice:
"Take care!
If anything happens, it will be so much the worse for you."
"Oho!
It seems the other's gaining on us!
...
But what are you afraid of, my dear count?
It's no doubt a traveller ... perhaps even some one they are sending to help us."
"I don't want any help," growled the German.
He leant out again.
The car was only two or three hundred yards behind.
He said to his men, pointing to Lupin.
"Bind him.
If he resists..."
He drew his revolver.
"Why should I resist, O gentle Teuton?" chuckled Lupin. And he added, while they were fastening his hands, "It is really curious to see how people take precautions when they need not and don't when they ought to. What the devil do you care about that motor? Accomplices of mine?
What an idea!"
Without replying, the German gave orders to the driver:
"To the right!
...
Slow down!
... Let them pass...
If they slow down also, stop!"
But, to his great surprise, the motor seemed, on the contrary, to increase its speed.
It passed in front of the car like a whirlwind, in a cloud of dust.
Standing up at the back, leaning over the hood, which was lowered, was a man dressed in black.
He raised his arm.
Two shots rang out.
The count, who was blocking the whole of the left window, fell back into the car.
Before even attending to him, the two men leapt upon Lupin and finished securing him.
"Jackasses!
Blockheads!"
shouted Lupin, shaking with rage.
"Let me go, on the contrary!
There now, we're stopping!
But go after him, you silly fools, catch him up!
...
It's the man in black, I tell you, the murderer!
... Oh, the idiots!
..."
They gagged him.
Then they attended to the count.
The wound did not appear to be serious and was soon dressed.
But the patient, who was in a very excited state, had an attack of fever and became delirious.
It was eight o'clock in the morning.
They were in the open country, far from any village.
The men had no information as to the exact object of the journey.
Where were they to go?
Whom were they to send to?
They drew up the motor beside a wood and waited.
The whole day went by in this way.
It was evening before a squad of cavalry arrived, dispatched from Treves in search of the motor-car.
Two hours later, Lupin stepped out of the car, and still escorted by his two Germans, by the light of a lantern climbed the steps of a staircase that led to a small room with iron-barred windows.
Here he spent the night.
The next morning, an officer led him, through a courtyard filled with soldiers, to the centre of a long row of buildings that ran round the foot of a mound covered with monumental ruins.
He was shown into a large, hastily-furnished room.
His visitor of two days back was sitting at a writing-table, reading newspapers and reports, which he marked with great strokes of red pencil:
"Leave us," he said to the officer.
And, going up to Lupin:
"The papers."
The tone was no longer the same.
It was now the harsh and imperious tone of the master who is at home and addressing an inferior ... and such an inferior!
A rogue, an adventurer of the worst type, before whom he had been obliged to humiliate himself!
"The papers," he repeated.
Lupin was not put out of countenance.
He said, quite calmly:
"They are in Veldenz Castle."
"We are in the out-buildings of the castle.
Those are the ruins of Veldenz, over there."
"The papers are in the ruins."
"Let us go to them.
Show me the way."
Lupin did not budge.
"Well?"
"Well, Sire, it is not as simple as you think.
It takes some time to bring into play the elements which are needed to open that hiding-place."
"How long do you want?"
"Twenty-four hours."
An angry movement, quickly suppressed:
"Oh, there was no question of that between us!"
"Nothing was specified, neither that nor the little trip which Your Imperial Majesty made me take in the charge of half a dozen of your body-guard.
I am to hand over the papers, that is all."
"And I am not to give you your liberty until you do hand over those papers."
"It is a question of confidence, Sire. I should have considered myself quite as much bound to produce the papers if I had been free on leaving prison; and Your Imperial Majesty may be sure that I should not have walked off with them.
The only difference is that they would now be in your possession.
For we have lost a day, Sire.
And a day, in this business ... is a day too much... Only, there it is, you should have had confidence."
The Emperor gazed with a certain amazement at that outcast, that vagabond, who seemed vexed that any one should doubt his word.
He did not reply, but rang the bell:
"The officer on duty," he commanded.
Count von Waldemar appeared, looking very white.
"Ah, it's you, Waldemar?
So you're all right again?"
"At your service, Sire."
"Take five men with you ... the same men, as you're sure of them. Don't leave this ... gentleman until to-morrow morning." He looked at his watch. "Until to-morrow morning at ten o'clock. No, I will give him till twelve.
You will go wherever he thinks fit to go, you will do whatever he tells you to do.
In short, you are at his disposal.
At twelve o'clock, I will join you.
If, at the last stroke of twelve, he has not handed me the bundle of letters, you will put him back in your car and, without losing a second, take him straight to the Santé Prison."
"If he tries to escape..."
"Take your own course."
He went out.
Lupin helped himself to a cigar from the table and threw himself into an easy chair:
"Good!
I just love that way of going to work.
It is frank and explicit."
The count had brought in his men.
He said to Lupin:
"March!"
Lupin lit his cigar and did not move.
"Bind his hands," said the count.
And, when the order was executed, he repeated:
"Now then, march!"
"No."
"What do you mean by no?"
"I'm wondering."
"What about?"
"Where on earth that hiding-place can be!"
The count gave a start and Lupin chuckled:
"For the best part of the story is that I have not the remotest idea where that famous hiding-place is nor how to set about discovering it.
What do you say to that, my dear Waldemar, eh?
Funny, isn't it?
... Not the very remotest idea!
..."
The ruins of Veldenz are well known to all who visit the banks of the Rhine and the Moselle.
They comprise the remains of the old feudal castle, built in 1377 by the Archbishop of Fistingen, an enormous dungeon-keep, gutted by Turenne's troops, and the walls, left standing in their entirety, of a large Renascence palace, in which the grand-dukes of Zweibrucken lived for three centuries.
It was this palace that was sacked by Hermann II. 's rebellious subjects. The empty windows display two hundred yawning cavities on the four frontages. All the wainscoting, the hangings and most of the furniture were burnt.
You walk on the scorched girders of the floors; and the sky can be seen at intervals through the ruined ceilings.
Lupin, accompanied by his escort, went over the whole building in two hours' time:
"I am very pleased with you, my dear count.
I don't think I ever came across a guide so well posted in his subject, nor - which is rare - so silent.
And now, if you don't mind, we will go to lunch."
As a matter of fact, Lupin knew no more than at the first moment and his perplexity did nothing but increase.
To obtain his release from prison and to strike the imagination of his visitor, he had bluffed, pretending to know everything; and he was still seeking for the best place at which to begin to seek.
"Things look bad," he said to himself, from time to time.
"Things are looking about as bad as they can look."
His brain, moreover, was not as clear as usual.
He was obsessed by an idea, the idea of "the other one," the murderer, the assassin, whom he knew to be still clinging to his footsteps.
How did that mysterious personality come to be on his tracks? How had he heard of Lupin's leaving prison and of his rush to Luxemburg and Germany? Was it a miraculous intuition? Or was it the outcome of definite information?
But, if so, at what price, by means of what promises or threats was he able to obtain it?
All these questions haunted Lupin's mind.
At about four o'clock, however, after a fresh walk through the ruins, in the course of which he had examined the stones, measured the thickness of the walls, investigated the shape and appearance of things, all to no purpose, he asked the count:
"Is there no one left who was in the service of the last grand-duke who lived in the castle?"
"All the servants of that time went different ways.
Only one of them continued to live in the district."
"Well?"
"He died two years ago."
"Any children?"
"He had a son, who married and who was dismissed, with his wife, for disgraceful conduct.
They left their youngest child behind, a little girl, Isilda."
"Where does she live?"
"She lives here, at the end of these buildings. The old grandfather used to act as a guide to visitors, in the days when the castle was still open to the public. Little Isilda has lived in the ruins ever since. She was allowed to remain out of pity.
She is a poor innocent, who is hardly able to talk and does not know what she says."
"Was she always like that?"
"It seems not.
Her reason went gradually, when she was about ten years old."
"In consequence of a sorrow, of a fright?"
"No, for no direct cause, I am told.
The father was a drunkard and the mother committed suicide in a fit of madness."
Lupin reflected and said:
"I should like to see her."
The count gave a rather curious smile:
"You can see her, by all means."
She happened to be in one of the rooms which had been set apart for her. Lupin was surprised to find an attractive little creature, too thin, too pale, but almost pretty, with her fair hair and her delicate face.
Her sea-green eyes had the vague, dreamy look of the eyes of blind people.
He put a few questions to which Isilda gave no answer and others to which she replied with incoherent sentences, as though she understood neither the meaning of the words addressed to her nor those which she herself uttered.
He persisted, taking her very gently by the hand and asking her in an affectionate tone about the time when she still had her reason, about her grandfather, about the memories which might be called up by her life as a child playing freely among the majestic ruins of the castle.
She stood silent, with staring eyes; impassive, any emotion which she might have felt was not enough to rouse her slumbering intelligence.
Lupin asked for a pencil and paper and wrote down the number 813.
The count smiled again.
"Look here, what are you laughing at?"
cried Lupin, irritably.
"Nothing ... nothing...
I'm very much interested, that's all..."
Isilda looked at the sheet of paper, when he showed it to her, and turned away her head, with a vacant air.
"No bite!"
said the count, satirically.
Lupin wrote the letters "APOON."
Isilda paid no more attention than before.
He did not give up the experiment, but kept on writing the same letters, each time watching the girl's face.
She did not stir, but kept her eyes fixed on the paper with an indifference which nothing seemed to disturb.
Then, all at once, she seized the pencil, snatched the last sheet out of Lupin's hands and, as though acting under a sudden inspiration, wrote two "L's" in the middle of a space left open by Lupin.
He felt a thrill.
A word had been formed: "APOLLON."
Meanwhile, Isilda clung to both pencil and paper and, with clutching fingers and a strained face, was struggling to make her hand submit to the hesitating orders of her poor little brain.
Lupin waited, feverishly.
She rapidly wrote another word, the word "DIANE."
"Another word!
... Another word!"
shouted Lupin.
She twisted her fingers round the pencil, broke the lead, made a big "J" with the stump and, now utterly exhausted, dropped the pencil.
"Another word!
I must have another word!"
said Lupin, in a tone of command, catching her by the arm.
But he saw by her eyes, which had once more become indifferent, that that fleeting gleam of intelligence could not shine out again.
"Let us go," he said.
He was walking away, when she ran after him and stood in his path.
He stopped:
"What is it?"
She held out the palm of her hand.
"What?
Money?
... Is she in the habit of begging?"
he asked the count.
"No," said Waldemar, "and I can't understand."
Isilda took two gold coins from her pocket and chinked them together, gleefully.
Lupin looked at them.
They were French coins, quite new, bearing the date of that year.
"Where did you get these?"
asked Lupin, excitedly.
"French money!
... Who gave it you?
... And when?
... Was it to-day?
Speak!
... Answer!
..." He shrugged his shoulders.
"Fool that I am!
As though she could answer!
... My dear count, would you mind lending me forty marks?
...
Thanks ...
Here, Isilda, that's for you."
She took the two coins, jingled them with the others in the palm of her hand and then, putting out her arm, pointed to the ruins of the Renascence palace, with a gesture that seemed to call attention more particularly to the left wing and to the top of that wing.
Was it a mechanical movement?
Or must it be looked upon as a grateful acknowledgment for the two gold coins?
He glanced at the count.
Waldemar was smiling again.
"What makes the brute keep on grinning like that?"
said Lupin to himself.
"Any one would think that he was having a game with me."
He went to the palace on the off-chance, attended by his escort.
The ground-floor consisted of a number of large reception-rooms, running one into the other and containing the few pieces of furniture that had escaped the fire.
On the first floor, on the north side, was a long gallery, out of which twelve handsome rooms opened all exactly alike.
There was a similar gallery on the second floor, but with twenty-four smaller rooms, also resembling one another.
All these apartments were empty, dilapidated, wretched to look at.
Above, there was nothing.
The attics had been burnt down.
For an hour, Lupin walked, ran, rushed about indefatigably, with his eyes on the look-out.
When it began to grow dusk, he hurried to one of his twelve rooms on the first floor, as if he were selecting it for special reasons known to himself alone.
He was rather surprised to find the Emperor there, smoking and seated in an arm-chair which he had sent for.
Taking no notice of his presence, Lupin began an inspection of the room, according to the methods which he was accustomed to employ in such cases, dividing the room into sections, each of which he examined in turn.
After twenty minutes of this work, he said:
"I must beg you, Sire, to be good enough to move.
There is a fireplace here..."
The Emperor tossed his head:
"Is it really necessary for me to move?"
"Yes, Sire, this fireplace ..."
"The fireplace is just the same as the others and the room is no different from its fellows."
Lupin looked at the Emperor without understanding.
The Emperor rose and said, with a laugh:
"I think, M. Lupin, that you have been making just a little fun of me."
"How do you mean, Sire?"
"Oh, it's hardly worth mentioning!
You obtained your release on the condition of handing me certain papers in which I am interested and you have not the smallest notion as to where they are.
I have been thoroughly &#8212; what do you call it, in French?
&#8212; roul&#233; 'done'!"
"Do you think so, Sire?"
"Why, what a man knows he doesn't have to hunt for!
And you have been hunting for ten good hours!
Doesn't it strike you as a case for an immediate return to prison?"
Lupin seemed thunderstruck:
"Did not Your Imperial Majesty fix twelve o'clock to-morrow as the last limit?"
"Why wait?"
"Why?
Well, to allow me to complete my work!"
"Your work?
But it's not even begun, M.
Lupin."
"There Your Imperial Majesty is mistaken."
"Prove it ... and I will wait until to-morrow."
Lupin reflected and, speaking in a serious tone:
"Since Your Imperial Majesty requires proofs in order to have confidence in me, I will furnish them. The twelve rooms leading out of this gallery each bear a different name, which is inscribed in French &#8212; obviously by a French decorative artist &#8212; over the various doors.
One of the inscriptions, less damaged by the fire than the others, caught my eye as I was passing along the gallery.
I examined the other doors: all of them bore hardly legible traces of names caned over the pediments.
Thus I found a 'D' and an 'E' the first and last letters of 'Diane.'
I found an 'A' and 'LON' which pointed to 'Apollon.'
These are the French equivalents of Diana and Apollo, both of them mythological deities.
The other inscriptions presented similar characteristics.
I discovered traces of such names as Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, Saturn and so on.
This part of the problem was solved: each of the twelve rooms bears the name of an Olympian god or goddess; and the letters APOON, completed by Isilda, point to the Apollo Room or Salle d'Apollon.
So it is here, in the room in which we now are, that the letters are hidden.
A few minutes, perhaps, will suffice in which to discover them."
"A few minutes or a few years ... or even longer!"
said the Emperor, laughing.
He seemed greatly amused; and the count also displayed a coarse merriment.
Lupin asked:
"Would Your Imperial Majesty be good enough to explain?"
"M. Lupin, the exciting investigation which you have conducted to-day and of which you are telling us the brilliant results has already been made by me ... yes, a fortnight ago, in the company of your friend Holmlock Shears.
Together we questioned little Isilda; together, we employed the same method in dealing with her that you did; and together we observed the names in the gallery and got as far as this room, the Apollo Room."
Lupin turned livid.
He spluttered:
"Oh, did Shears get ... as far as ...
this?"
"Yes, after four days' searching.
True, it did not help us, for we found nothing.
All the same, I know that the letters are not here."
Trembling with rage, wounded in his innermost pride, Lupin fired up under the gibe, as though he had been lashed with a whip. He had never felt humiliated to such a degree as this. In this fury, he could have strangled the fat Waldemar, whose laughter incensed him.
Containing himself with an effort, he said:
"It took Shears four days, Sire, and me only four hours.
And I should have required even less, if I had not been thwarted in my search."
"And by whom, bless my soul?
By my faithful count?
I hope he did not dare ...
!"
"No, Sire, but by the most terrible and powerful of my enemies, by that infernal being who killed his own accomplice Altenheim."
"Is he here?
Do you think so?"
exclaimed the Emperor, with an agitation which showed that he was familiar with every detail of the dramatic story.
"He is wherever I am. He threatens me with his constant hatred. It was he who guessed that I was M. Lenormand, the chief of the detective-service; it was he who had me put in prison; it was he, again, who pursued me, on the day when I came out.
Yesterday, aiming at me in the motor, he wounded Count von Waldemar."
"But how do you know, how can you be sure that he is at Veldenz?"
"Isilda has received two gold coins, two French coins!"
"And what is he here for?
With what object?"
"I don't know, Sire, but he is the very spirit of evil.
Your Imperial Majesty must be on your guard: he is capable of anything and everything."
"It is impossible!
I have two hundred men in the ruins.
He cannot have entered.
He would have been seen."
"Some one has seen him, beyond a doubt."
"Who?"
"Isilda."
"Let her be questioned!
Waldemar, take your prisoner to where the girl is."
Lupin showed his bound hands:
"It will be a tough battle.
Can I fight like this?"
The Emperor said to the count:
"Unfasten him... And keep me informed."
In this way, by a sudden effort, bringing the hateful vision of the murder into the discussion, boldly, without evidence, Ars&#232;ne Lupin gained time and resumed the direction of the search:
"Sixteen hours still," he said to himself, "it's more than I want."
He reached the premises occupied by Isilda, at the end of the old out-buildings.
These buildings served as barracks for the two hundred soldiers guarding the ruins; and the whole of this, the left wing, was reserved for the officers.
Isilda was not there.
The count sent two of his men to look for her.
They came back.
No one had seen the girl.
Nevertheless, she could not have left the precincts of the ruins.
As for the Renascence palace, it was, so to speak, invested by one-half of the troops; and no one was able to obtain admittance.
At last, the wife of a subaltern who lived in the next house declared that she had been sitting at her window all day and that the girl had not been out.
"If she hadn't gone out," said Waldemar, "she would be here now: and she is not here."
Lupin observed:
"Is there a floor above?"
"Yes, but from this room to the upper floor there is no staircase."
"Yes, there is."
He pointed to a little door opening on a dark recess.
In the shadow, he saw the first treads of a staircase as steep as a ladder.
"Please, my dear count," he said to Waldemar, who wanted to go up, "let me have the honor."
"Why?"
"There's danger."
He ran up and at once sprang into a low and narrow loft.
A cry escaped him:
"Oh!"
"What is it?"
asked the count, emerging in his turn.
"Here ... on the floor... Isilda..."
He knelt down beside the girl, but, at the first glance, saw that she was simply stunned and that she bore no trace of a wound, except a few scratches on the wrists and hands.
A handkerchief was stuffed into her mouth by way of a gag.
"That's it," he said.
"The murderer was here with her.
When we came, he struck her a blow with his fist and gagged her so that we should not hear her moans."
"But how did he get away?"
"Through here ... look ... there is a passage connecting all the attics on the first floor."
"And from there?"
"From there, he went down the stairs of one of the other dwellings."
"But he would have been seen!"
"Pooh, who knows?
The creature's invisible.
Never mind!
Send your men to look.
Tell them to search all the attics and all the ground-floor lodgings."
He hesitated.
Should he also go in pursuit of the murderer?
But a sound brought him back to the girl's side.
She had got up from the floor and a dozen pieces of gold money had dropped from her hands.
He examined them.
They were all French.
"Ah," he said, "I was right!
Only, why so much gold?
In reward for what?"
Suddenly, he caught sight of a book on the floor and stooped to pick it up.
But the girl darted forward with a quicker movement, seized the book and pressed it to her bosom with a fierce energy, as though prepared to defend it against any attempt to take hold of it.
"That's it," he said.
"The money was offered her for the book, but she refused to part with it.
Hence the scratches on the hands.
The interesting thing would be to know why the murderer wished to possess the book.
Was he able to look through it first?"
He said to Waldemar:
"My dear count, please give the order."
Waldemar made a sign to his men.
Three of them threw themselves on the girl and, after a hard tussle, in which the poor thing stamped, writhed and screamed with rage, they took the volume from her.
"Gently, child," said Lupin, "be calm...
It's all in a good cause... Keep an eye on her, will you?
Meanwhile, I will have a look at the object in dispute."
It was an odd volume of Montesquieu's Voyage au temple de Guide, in a binding at least a century old.
But Lupin had hardly opened it before he exclaimed:
"I say, I say, this is queer!
There is a sheet of parchment stuck on each right hand page; and those sheets are covered with a very close, small handwriting."
He read, at the beginning:
"Diary of the Chevalier Gilles de Malrêche, French servant to His Royal Highness the Prince of Zweibruckenveldenz, begun in the Year of Our Lord 1794."
"What!
Does it say that?"
asked the count.
"What surprises you?"
"Isilda's grandfather, the old man who died two years ago, was called Malreich, which is the German form of the same name."
"Capital!
Isilda's grandfather must have been the son or the grandson of the French servant who wrote his diary in an odd volume of Montesquieu's works.
And that is how the diary came into Isilda's hands."
He turned the pages at random:
"15 September, 1796.
His Royal Highness went hunting.
"20 September, 1796.
His Royal Highness went out riding.
He was mounted on Cupidon."
"By Jove!"
muttered Lupin.
"So far, it's not very exciting."
He turned over a number of pages and read:
"12 March, 1803.
I have remitted ten crowns to Hermann.
He is giving music-lessons in London."
Lupin gave a laugh:
"Oho!
Hermann is dethroned and our respect comes down with a rush!"
"Yes," observed Waldemar, "the reigning grand-duke was driven from his dominions by the French troops."
Lupin continued:
"1809.
Tuesday.
Napoleon slept at Veldenz last night.
I made His Majesty's bed and this morning I emptied his slops."
"Oh, did Napoleon stop at Veldenz?"
"Yes, yes, on his way back to the army, at the time of the Austrian campaign, which ended with the battle of Wagram.
It was an honor of which the grand-duchal family were very proud afterwards."
Lupin went on reading:
"28 October, 1814.
His Royal Highness returned to his dominions.
"29 October, 1814.
I accompanied His Royal Highness to the hiding-place last night and was happy to be able to show him that no one had guessed its existence.
For that matter, who would have suspected that a hiding-place could be contrived in ..."
Lupin stopped, with a shout.
Isilda had suddenly escaped from the men guarding her, made a grab at him and taken to flight, carrying the book with her.
"Oh, the little mischief!
Quick, you!
... Go round by the stairs below.
I'll run after her by the passage."
But she had slammed the door behind her and bolted it.
He had to go down and run along the buildings with the others, looking for a staircase which would take them to the first floor.
The fourth house was the only one open. He went upstairs.
But the passage was empty and he had to knock at doors, force locks and make his way into unoccupied rooms, while Waldemar, showing as much ardor in the pursuit as himself, pricked the curtains and hangings with the point of his sword.
A voice called out from the ground-floor, towards the right wing.
They rushed in that direction.
It was one of the officers' wives, who beckoned to them at the end of a passage and told them that the girl must be in her lodging.
"How do you know?"
asked Lupin.
"I wanted to go to my room.
The door was shut and I could not get in."
Lupin tried and found the door locked:
"The window!"
he cried.
"There must be a window!"
He went outside, took the count's sword and smashed the panes.
Then, helped up by two men, he hung on to the wall, passed his arm through the broken glass, turned the latch and stumbled into the room.
He saw Isilda huddled before the fireplace, almost in the midst of the flames:
"The little beast!"
he said.
"She has thrown it into the fire!"
He pushed her back savagely, tried to take the book and burnt his hands in the attempt.
Then, with the tongs, he pulled it out of the grate and threw the table cloth over it to stifle the blaze.
But it was too late.
The pages of the old manuscript, all burnt up, were falling into ashes.
Lupin gazed at her in silence.
The count said:
"One would think that she knew what she was doing."
"No, she does not know.
Only, her grandfather must have entrusted her with that book as a sort of treasure, a treasure which no one was ever to set eyes on, and, with her stupid instinct, she preferred to throw it into the fire rather than part with it."
"Well then..."
"Well then what?"
"You won't find the hiding-place."
"Aha, my dear count, so you did, for a moment, look upon my success as possible?
And Lupin does not strike you as quite a charlatan?
Make your mind easy, Waldemar: Lupin has more than one string to his bow.
I shall succeed."
"Before twelve o'clock to-morrow?"
"Before twelve o'clock to-night.
But, for the moment, I am starving with hunger.
And, if your kindness would go so far..."
He was taken to the sergeants' mess and a substantial meal prepared for him, while the count went to make his report to the Emperor.
Twenty minutes later, Waldemar returned and they sat down and dined together, opposite each other, silent and pensive.
"Waldemar, a good cigar would be a treat...
I thank you... Ah, this one crackles as a self-respecting Havana should!"
He lit his cigar and, after a minute or two:
"You can smoke, count; I don't mind in the least; in fact, I rather like it."
An hour passed.
Waldemar dozed and, from time to time, swallowed a glass of brandy to wake himself up.
Soldiers passed in and out, waiting on them.
"Coffee," asked Lupin.
They brought him some coffee.
"What bad stuff!"
he grumbled.
"If that's what Caesar drinks!
... Give me another cup all the same, Waldemar.
We may have a long night before us.
Oh, what vile coffee!"
He lit a second cigar and did not say another word.
Ten minutes passed.
He continued not to move or speak.
Suddenly, Waldemar sprang to his feet and said to Lupin, angrily:
"Hi!
Stand up, there!"
Lupin was whistling a tune at the moment.
He kept on whistling, peacefully.
"Stand up, I say!"
Lupin turned round.
His Imperial Majesty had just entered.
Lupin rose from his chair.
"How far are we?"
asked the Emperor.
"I think, Sire, that I shall be able to satisfy Your Imperial Majesty soon."
"What?
Do you know ..."
"The hiding-place?
Very nearly, Sire... A few details still escape me ... but everything will be cleared up, once we are on the spot: I have no doubt of it."
"Are we to stay here?"
"No, Sire, I will beg you to go with me to the Renascence palace.
But we have plenty of time; and, if Your Imperial Majesty will permit me, I should like first to think over two or three points."
Without waiting for the reply, he sat down, to Waldemar's great indignation.
In a few minutes, the Emperor, who had walked away and was talking to the count, came up to him:
"Are you ready now, M.
Lupin?"
Lupin kept silence.
A fresh question.
His head fell on his chest.
"But he's asleep; I really believe that he's asleep!"
Waldemar, beside himself with rage, shook him violently by the shoulder.
Lupin fell from his chair, sank to the floor, gave two or three convulsive movements and then lay quite still.
"What's the matter with him?"
exclaimed the Emperor.
"He's not dead, I hope!"
He took a lamp and bent over him:
"How pale he is!
A face like wax!
... Look, Waldemar... Feel his heart...
He's alive, is he not?"
"Yes, Sire," said the count, after a moment, "the heart is beating quite regularly."
"Then what is it?
I don't understand... What happened?"
"Shall I go and fetch the doctor?"
"Yes, run..."
The doctor found Lupin in the same state, lying inert and quiet.
He had him put on a bed, subjected him to a long examination and asked what he had had to eat.
"Do you suspect a case of poisoning, doctor?"
"No, Sire, there are no traces of poisoning.
But I am thinking ... what's on that tray and in that cup?"
"Coffee," said the count.
"For you?"
"No, for him.
I did not have any."
The doctor poured out some coffee, tasted it and said:
"I was right.
He has been put to sleep with a narcotic."
"But by whom?"
cried the Emperor, angrily.
"Look here, Waldemar; it's exasperating, the way things happen in this place!"
"Sire?
..."
"Well, yes, I've had enough of it!
...
I am really beginning to believe that the man's right and that there is some one in the castle... That French money, that narcotic..."
"If any one had got into this enclosure, Sire, it would be known by this time... We've been hunting in every direction for three hours."
"Still, I didn't make the coffee, I assure you... And, unless you did..."
"Oh, Sire!"
"Well, then, hunt about ... search... You have two hundred men at your disposal; and the out-houses are not so large as all that!
For, after all, the ruffian is prowling round here, round these buildings ... near the kitchen ... somewhere or other!
Go and bustle about!"
The fat Waldemar bustled about all night, conscientiously, because it was the master's order, but without conviction, because it was impossible for a stranger to hide among ruins which were so well-watched.
And, as a matter of fact, the event proved that he was right: the investigations were fruitless; and no one was able to discover the mysterious hand that had prepared the narcotic drink.
Lupin spent the night lifeless on his bed.
In the morning, the doctor, who had not left his side, told a messenger of the Emperor's that he was still asleep.
At nine o'clock, however, he made his first movement, a sort of effort to wake up.
Later on, he stammered:
"What time is it?"
"Twenty-five to ten."
He made a fresh effort; and it was evident that, in the midst of his torpor, his whole being was intent upon returning to life.
A clock struck ten.
He started and said:
"Let them carry me; let them carry me to the palace."
With the doctor's approval, Waldemar called his men and sent word to the Emperor.
They laid Lupin on a stretcher and set out for the palace.
"The first floor," he muttered.
They carried him up.
"At the end of the corridor," he said.
"The last room on the left."
They carried him to the last room, which was the twelfth, and gave him a chair, on which he sat down, exhausted.
The Emperor arrived: Lupin did not stir, sat looking, unconscious, with no expression in his eyes.
Then, in a few minutes, he seemed to wake, looked round him, at the walls, the ceilings, the people, and said:
"A narcotic, I suppose?"
"Yes," said the doctor.
"Have they found ... the man?"
"No."
He seemed to be meditating and several times jerked his head with a thoughtful air: but they soon saw that he was asleep.
The Emperor went up to Waldemar:
"Order your car round."
"Oh?
...
But then, Sire ...
?"
"Well, what?
I am beginning to think that he is taking us in and that all this is merely play-acting, to gain time."
"Possibly ... yes ..." said Waldemar, agreeing.
"It's quite obvious!
He is making the most of certain curious coincidences, but he knows nothing; and his story about gold coins and his narcotic are so many inventions!
If we lend ourselves to his little game any longer, he'll slip out of your fingers.
Your car, Waldemar."
The count gave his orders and returned.
Lupin had not woke up.
The Emperor, who was looking round the room, said to Waldemar:
"This is the Minerva room, is it not?"
"Yes, Sire."
"But then why is there an 'N' in two places?"
There were, in fact, two "N's," one over the chimneypiece, the other over an old dilapidated clock fitted into the wall and displaying a complicated set of works, with weights hanging lifeless at the end of their cords.
"The two 'N's' ..." said Waldemar.
The Emperor did not listen to the answer.
Lupin had moved again, opening his eyes and uttering indistinct syllables.
He stood up, walked across the room and fell down from sheer weakness.
Then came the struggle, the desperate struggle of his brain, his nerves, his will against that hideous, paralyzing torpor, the struggle of a dying man against death, the struggle of life against extinction.
And the sight was one of infinite sadness.
"He is suffering," muttered Waldemar.
"Or at least, he is pretending to suffer," declared the Emperor, "and pretending very cleverly at that.
What an actor!"
Lupin stammered:
"An injection, doctor, an injection of caffeine ... at once..."
"May I, Sire?"
asked the doctor.
"Certainly... Until twelve o'clock, do all that he asks.
He has my promise."
"How many minutes ... before twelve o'clock?"
asked Lupin.
"Forty," said somebody.
"Forty? ... I shall do it... I am sure to do it... I've got to do it..." He took his head in his two hands. "Oh, if I had my brain, the real brain, the brain that thinks! It would be a matter of a second!
There is only one dark spot left ... but I cannot ... my thoughts escape me... I can't grasp it ... it's awful."
His shoulders shook.
Was he crying?
They heard him repeating:
"813 ... 813..." And, in a lower voice, "813 ... an '8' ... a '1' ... a '3' ... yes, of course...
But why?
... That's not enough..."
The Emperor muttered:
"He impresses me.
I find it difficult to believe that a man can play a part like that..."
Half-past eleven struck ... a quarter to twelve...
Lupin remained motionless, with his fists glued to his temples.
The Emperor waited, with his eyes fixed on a chronometer which Waldemar held in his hand.
Ten minutes more ... five minutes more ...
"Is the car there, Waldemar?
... Are your men ready?"
"Yes, Sire."
"Is that watch of yours a repeater, Waldemar?"
"Yes, Sire."
"At the last stroke of twelve, then..."
"But ..."
"At the last stroke of twelve, Waldemar."
There was really something tragic about the scene, that sort of grandeur and solemnity which the hours assume at the approach of a possible miracle, when it seems as though the voice of fate itself were about to find utterance.
The Emperor did not conceal his anguish.
This fantastic adventurer who was called Arsène Lupin and whose amazing life he knew, this man troubled him ... and, although he was resolved to make an end of all this dubious story, he could not help waiting ... and hoping.
Two minutes more ... one minute more ...
Then they counted by seconds.
Lupin seemed asleep.
"Come, get ready," said the Emperor to the count.
The count went up to Lupin and placed his hand on his shoulder.
The silvery chime of the repeater quivered and struck ... one, two, three, four, five ...
"Waldemar, old chap, pull the weights of the old clock."
A moment of stupefaction.
It was Lupin's voice, speaking very calmly.
Waldemar, annoyed at the familiarity of the address, shrugged his shoulders.
"Do as he says, Waldemar," said the Emperor.
"Yes, do as I say, my dear count," echoed Lupin, recovering his powers of chaff. "You know the ropes so well ... all you have to do is to pull those of the clock ... in turns ... one, two ... capital!
... That's how they used to wind it up in the old days."
The pendulum, in fact, was started; and they heard its regular ticking.
"Now the hands," said Lupin.
"Set them at a little before twelve ... Don't move ... Let me ..."
He rose and walked to the face of the clock, standing two feet away, at most, with his eyes fixed, with every nerve attentive.
The twelve strokes sounded, twelve heavy, deep strokes.
A long silence.
Nothing happened.
Nevertheless, the Emperor waited, as though he were sure that something was going to happen.
And Waldemar did not move, stood with wide-open eyes.
Lupin, who had stooped over the clock-face, now drew himself up, muttering:
"That's it ...
I have it..."
He went back to his chair and commanded:
"Waldemar, set the hands at two minutes to twelve again.
Oh, no, old chap, not backwards!
The way the hands go!
...
Yes, I know, it will take rather long ... but it can't be helped."
All the hours struck and the half hours, up to half-past eleven.
"Listen, Waldemar," said Lupin.
And he spoke seriously, without jesting, as though himself excited and anxious:
"Listen, Waldemar. Do you see on the face of the clock a little round dot marking the first hour? That dot is loose, isn't it? Put the fore-finger of your left hand on it and press. Good. Do the same with your thumb on the dot marking the third hour.
Good.
With your right hand, push in the dot at the eighth hour.
Good.
Thank you.
Go and sit down, my dear fellow."
The minute-hand shifted, moved to the twelfth dot and the clock struck again.
Lupin was silent and very white.
The twelve strokes rang out in the silence.
At the twelfth stroke, there was a sound as of a spring being set free.
The clock stopped dead.
The pendulum ceased swinging.
And suddenly, the bronze ornament representing a ram's head, which crowned the dial, fell forwards, uncovering a sort of little recess cut out of the stone wall.
In this recess was a chased silver casket.
Lupin took it and carried it to the Emperor:
"Would Your Imperial Majesty be so good as to open it yourself?
The letters which you instructed me to look for are inside."
The Emperor raised the lid and seemed greatly astonished.
The casket was empty.
The casket was empty.
It was an enormous, unforeseen sensation.
After the success of the calculation made by Lupin, after the ingenious discovery of the secret of the clock, the Emperor, who had no doubt left as to the ultimate success, appeared utterly confounded.
Opposite him was Lupin, pallid and wan, with drawn jaws and bloodshot eyes, gnashing his teeth with rage and impotent hate.
He wiped the perspiration from his forehead, then snatched up the casket, turned it over, examined it, as though he hoped to find a false bottom.
At last, for greater certainty, in a fit of fury, he crushed it, with an irresistible grip.
That relieved him.
He breathed more easily.
The Emperor said:
"Who has done this?"
"Still the same man, Sire, the one who is following the same road as I and pursuing the same aim: Mr. Kesselbach's murderer."
"When?"
"Last night. Ah, Sire, why did you not leave me free when I came out of prison! Had I been free, I should have come here without losing an hour. I should have arrived before him! I should have given Isilda money before he did!
I should have read Malreich, the old French servant's diary, before he did!"
"So you think that it was through the revelations in the diary ...
?"
"Why, yes, Sire!
He had time to read them.
And, lurking I don't know where, kept informed of all our movements by I don't know whom, he put me to sleep last night, in order to get rid of me."
"But the palace was guarded."
"Guarded by your soldiers, Sire.
Does that count with a man like him?
Besides, I have no doubt that Waldemar concentrated his search upon the out-buildings, thus thinning the posts in the palace."
"But the sound of the clock!
Those twelve strokes in the night!"
"It was mere child's play, Sire, mere child's play, to him, to prevent the clock from striking!"
"All this seems very impossible to my mind."
"It all seems monstrous clear to mine, Sire!
If it were possible to feel in every one of your soldiers' pockets here and now, or to know how much money they will each of them spend during the next twelve months, we should be sure to find two or three who are, at this moment, in possession of a few bank-notes: French bank-notes, of course."
"Oh!"
protested Waldemar.
"But yes, my dear count, it is a question of price; and that makes no difference to 'him.'
If 'he' wished, I am sure that you yourself ..."
The Emperor, wrapped up in his own thoughts, was not listening.
He walked across the room from left to right and right to left, then beckoned to one of the officers standing in the gallery:
"My car... And tell them to get ready... We're starting."
He stopped, watched Lupin for a moment and, going up to the count:
"You too, Waldemar, be off ... Straight to Paris, without a break ..."
Lupin pricked up his ears.
He heard Waldemar reply:
"I should like to have a dozen additional guards... With that devil of a man..."
"Take them.
And look sharp.
You must get there to-night."
Lupin stamped his foot violently on the floor:
"Well, no, Sire!
No, no, no!
It shan't be, I swear it shan't!
No, no never!"
"What do you mean?"
"And the letters, Sire?
The stolen letters?"
"Upon my word!
..."
"So!"
cried Lupin, indignantly folding his arms.
"So your Imperial Majesty gives up the struggle?
You look upon the defeat as irretrievable?
You declare yourself beaten?
Well, I do not, Sire.
I have begun and I mean to finish."
The Emperor smiled at this display of mettle:
"I do not give up, but my police will set to work."
Lupin burst out laughing:
"Excuse me, Sire! It is so funny! Your police! Your Imperial Majesty's police! Why, they're worth just about as much as any other police, that is to say, nothing, nothing at all! No, Sire, I will not return to the Santé! Prison I can afford to laugh at.
But time enough has been wasted as it is.
I need my freedom against that man and I mean to keep it."
The Emperor shrugged his shoulders:
"You don't even know who the man is."
"I shall know, Sire. And I alone can know. And he knows that I am the only one who can know. I am his only enemy. I am the only one whom he attacks. It was I whom he meant to hit, the other day, when he fired his revolver.
He considered it enough to put me and me only to sleep, last night, to be free to do as he pleased.
The fight lies between him and me.
The outside world has nothing to say to it.
No one can help me and no one can help him.
There are two of us; and that is all.
So far, chance has favored him.
But, in the long run, it is inevitable, it is doomed that I should gain the day."
"Why?"
"Because I am the better man."
"Suppose he kills you?"
"He will not kill me.
I shall draw his claws, I shall make him perfectly harmless.
And you shall have the letters, Sire.
They are yours.
There is no power on earth than can prevent me from restoring them to you."
He spoke with a violent conviction and a tone of certainty that gave to the things which he foretold the real appearance of things already accomplished.
The Emperor could not help undergoing a vague, inexplicable feeling in which there was a sort of admiration combined with a good deal of that confidence which Lupin was demanding in so masterful a manner.
In reality, he was hesitating only because of his scruples against employing this man and making him, so to speak, his ally.
And, anxiously, not knowing what decision to take, he walked from the gallery to the windows without saying a word.
At last, he asked:
"And who says that the letters were stolen last night?"
"The theft is dated, Sire."
"What do you say?"
"Look at the inner side of the pediment which concealed the hiding-place.
The date is written in white chalk: 'Midnight, 24 August.'
..."
"So it is," muttered the Emperor, nonplussed.
"How was it that I did not see?"
And he added, betraying his curiosity, "Just as with those two 'N's' painted on the wall...
I can't understand.
This is the Minerva Room."
"This is the room in which Napoleon, the Emperor of the French slept," said Lupin.
"How do you know?"
"Ask Waldemar, Sire. As for myself, when I was turning over the old servants' diary, it came upon me as a flash of light. I understood that Shears and I had been on the wrong scent.
APOON, the imperfect word written by the Grand-duke Hermann on his death-bed, is a contraction not of Apollon, but of Napoleon."
"That's true ... you are right," said the Emperor.
"The same letters occur in both words and in the same order.
The grand-duke evidently meant to write 'Napoleon.'
But that figure 813?
..."
"Ah, that was the point that gave me most trouble.
I always had an idea that we must add up the three figures 8, 1 and 3; and the number 12, thus obtained, seemed to me at once to apply to this room, which is the twelfth leading out of the gallery.
But that was not enough for me.
There must be something else, something which my enfeebled brain could not succeed in translating into words.
The sight of that clock, situated precisely in the Napoleon Room, was a revelation to me.
The number 12 evidently meant twelve o'clock.
The hour of noon!
The hour of midnight!
Is this not the solemn moment which a man most readily selects?
But why those three figures 8, 1 and 3, rather than any others which would have given the same total? ...
It was then that I thought of making the clock strike for the first time, by way of experiment.
And it was while making it strike that I saw the dots of the first, third and eighth hour were movable and that they alone were movable.
I therefore obtained three figures, 1, 3 and 8, which, placed in a more prophetic order, gave the number 813.
Waldemar pushed the three dots, the spring was released and Your Imperial Majesty knows the result...
This, Sire, is the explanation of that mysterious word and of those three figures 8, 1, 3 which the grand-duke wrote with his dying hand and by the aid of which he hoped that his son would one day recover the secret of Veldenz and become the possessor of the famous letters which he had hidden there."
The Emperor listened with eager attention, more and more surprised at the ingenuity, perspicacity, shrewdness and intelligent will which he observed in the man.
"Waldemar," he said, when Lupin had finished.
"Sire?"
But, just as he was about to speak, shouts were heard in the gallery outside.
Waldemar left the room and returned:
"It's the mad girl, Sire.
They won't let her pass."
"Let her come in."
cried Lupin, eagerly.
"She must come in, Sire."
At a sign from the Emperor, Waldemar went out to fetch Isilda.
Her entrance caused a general stupefaction.
Her pale face was covered with dark blotches.
Her distorted features bore signs of the keenest suffering.
She panted for breath, with her two hands clutched against her breast.
"Oh!"
cried Lupin, struck with horror.
"What is it?"
asked the Emperor.
"Your doctor, Sire.
There is not a moment to lose."
He went up to her:
"Speak, Isilda... Have you seen anything?
Have you anything to say?"
The girl had stopped; her eyes were less vacant, as though lighted up by the pain.
She uttered sounds... but not a word.
"Listen," said Lupin.
"Answer yes or no ... make a movement of the head ... Have you seen him?
Do you know where he is?
... You know who he is...
Listen!
if you don't answer..."
He suppressed a gesture of anger.
But, suddenly, remembering the experiment of the day before and that she seemed rather to have retained a certain optical memory of the time when she enjoyed her full reason, he wrote on the white wall a capital "L" and "M."
She stretched out her arm toward the letters and nodded her head as though in assent.
"And then?"
said Lupin.
"What then?
... Write something yourself."
But she gave a fearful scream and flung herself to the ground, yelling.
Then, suddenly, came silence, immobility.
One last convulsive spasm.
And she moved no more.
"Dead?"
asked the Emperor.
"Poisoned, Sire."
"Oh, the poor thing!
... And by whom?"
"By 'him,' Sire.
She knew him, no doubt.
He must have been afraid of what she might tell."
The doctor arrived.
The Emperor pointed to the girl.
Then, addressing Waldemar:
"All your men to turn out ... Make them go through the houses ... telegraph to the stations on the frontier..."
He went up to Lupin:
"How long do you want to recover the letters?"
"A month, Sire ... two months at most."
"Very well.
Waldemar will wait for you here.
He shall have my orders and full powers to grant you anything you wish."
"What I should like, Sire, is my freedom."
"You are free."
Lupin watched him walk away and said, between his teeth:
"My freedom first... And afterward, when I have given you back the letters, O Majesty, one little shake of the hand!
Then we shall be quits!
..."
"Will you see this gentleman, ma'am?"
Dolores Kesselbach took the card from the footman and read:
"André Beauny... No," she said, "I don't know him."
"The gentleman seems very anxious to see you, ma'am.
He says that you are expecting him."
"Oh ... possibly...
Yes, bring him here."
Since the events which had upset her life and pursued her with relentless animosity, Dolores, after staying at the Hôtel Bristol had taken up her abode in a quiet house in the Rue des Vignes, down at Passy.
A pretty garden lay at the back of the house and was surrounded by other leafy gardens.
On days when attacks more painful than usual did not keep her from morning till night behind the closed shutters of her bedroom, she made her servants carry her under the trees, where she lay stretched at full length, a victim to melancholy, incapable of fighting against her hard fate.
Footsteps sounded on the gravel-path and the footman returned, followed by a young man, smart in appearance and very simply dressed, in the rather out-of-date fashion adopted by some of our painters, with a turn-down collar and a flowing necktie of white spots on a blue ground.
The footman withdrew.
"Your name is André Beauny, I believe?"
said Dolores.
"Yes, madame."
"I have not the honor ..."
"I beg your pardon, madame.
Knowing that I was a friend of Mme.
Ernemont, Geneviève's grandmother, you wrote to her, at Garches, saying that you wished to speak to me.
I have come."
Dolores rose in her seat, very excitedly:
"Oh, you are ..."
"Yes."
She stammered:
"Really?
... Is it you?
...
I do not recognize you."
"You don't recognize Prince Paul Sernine?"
"No ... everything is different ... the forehead ... the eyes... And that is not how the ..."
"How the newspapers represented the prisoner at the Santé?"
he said, with a smile.
"And yet it is I, really."
A long silence followed, during which they remained embarrassed and ill at ease.
At last, he asked:
"May I know the reason ...
?"
"Did not Geneviève tell you?
..."
"I have not seen her ... but her grandmother seemed to think that you required my services ..."
"That's right ... that's right..."
"And in what way ... ?
I am so pleased ..."
She hesitated a second and then whispered:
"I am afraid."
"Afraid?"
he cried.
"Yes," she said, speaking in a low voice, "I am afraid, afraid of everything, afraid of to-day and of to-morrow ... and of the day after ... afraid of life.
I have suffered so much...
I can bear no more."
He looked at her with great pity in his eyes.
The vague feeling that had always drawn him to this woman took a more precise character now that she was asking for his protection.
He felt an eager need to devote himself to her, wholly, without hope of reward.
She continued:
"I am alone now, quite alone, with servants whom I have picked up on chance, and I am afraid...
I feel that people are moving about me."
"But with what object?"
"I do not know.
But the enemy is hovering around and coming closer."
"Have you seen him?
Have you noticed anything?"
"Yes, the other day two men passed several times in the street and stopped in front of the house."
"Can you describe them?"
"I saw one of them better than the other.
He was tall and powerful, clean-shaven and wore a little black cloth jacket, cut quite short."
"A waiter at a café, perhaps?"
"Yes, a head-waiter. I had him followed by one of my servants. He went down the Rue de la Pompe and entered a common-looking house. The ground-floor is occupied by a wine-shop: it is the first house in the street, on the left.
Then, a night or two ago, I saw a shadow in the garden from my bedroom window."
"Is that all?"
"Yes."
He thought and then made a suggestion:
"Would you allow two of my men to sleep downstairs, in one of the ground-floor rooms?"
"Two of your men?
..."
"Oh, you need not be afraid!
They are decent men, old Charolais and his son, and they don't look in the least like what they are... You will be quite safe with them... As for me ..."
See Arsène Lupin, by Edgar Jepson and Maurice Leblanc.
He hesitated.
He was waiting for her to ask him to come again.
As she was silent, he said:
"As for me, it is better that I should not be seen here...
Yes, it is better ... for your sake.
My men will let me know how things go on..."
He would have liked to say more and to remain and to sit down beside her and comfort her.
But he had a feeling that they had said all that they had to say and that a single word more, on his side, would be an insult.
Then he made her a very low bow and went away.
He went up the garden, walking quickly, in his haste to be outside and master his emotion.
The footman was waiting for him at the hall-door.
As he passed out into the street, somebody rang, a young woman.
He gave a start:
"Geneviève!"
She fixed a pair of astonished eyes upon him and at once recognized him, although bewildered by the extreme youthfulness of his appearance; and this gave her such a shock that she staggered and had to lean against the door for support.
He had taken off his hat and was looking at her without daring to put out his hand.
Would she put out hers?
He was no longer Prince Sernine: he was Arsène Lupin.
And she knew that he was Arsène Lupin and that he had just come out of prison.
It was raining outside.
She gave her umbrella to the footman and said:
"Please open it and put it somewhere to dry."
Then she walked straight in.
"My poor old chap!" said Lupin to himself, as he walked away. "What a series of blows for a sensitive and highly-strung creature like yourself! You must keep a watch on your heart or ... Ah, what next? Here are my eyes beginning to water now! That's a bad sign.
M. Lupin: you're growing old!"
He gave a tap on the shoulder to a young man who was crossing the Chaussee de la Muette and going toward the Rue des Vignes.
The young man stopped, stared at him and said:
"I beg your pardon, monsieur, but I don't think I have the honor ..."
"Think again, my dear M. Leduc.
Or has your memory quite gone?
Don't you remember Versailles?
And the little room at the Hôtel des Trois-Empereurs?"
The young man bounded backwards:
"You!"
"Why, yes, I! Prince Sernine, or rather Lupin, since you know my real name! Did you think that Lupin had departed this life? ... Oh, yes, I see, prison... You were hoping ... Get out, you baby!" He patted him gently on the shoulder.
"There, there, young fellow, don't be frightened: you have still a few nice quiet days left to write your poems in.
The time has not yet come.
Write your verses ... poet!"
Then he gripped Leduc's arm violently and, looking him full in the face, said:
"But the time is drawing near ... poet!
Don't forget that you belong to me, body and soul.
And prepare to play your part.
It will be a hard and magnificent part.
And, as I live, I believe you're the man to play it!"
He burst out laughing, turned on one foot and left young Leduc astounded.
A little further, at the corner of the Rue de la Pompe, stood the wine-shop of which Mrs. Kesselbach had spoken to him.
He went in and had a long talk with the proprietor.
Then he took a taxi and drove to the Grand Hotel, where he was staying under the name of André Beauny, and found the brothers Doudeville waiting for him.
Lupin, though used to that sort of pleasure, nevertheless enjoyed the marks of admiration and devotion with which his friends overwhelmed him:
"But, governor, tell us ... what happened?
We're accustomed to all sorts of wonders with you; but still, there are limits...
So you are free?
And here you are, in the heart of Paris, scarcely disguised...
!"
"Have a cigar," said Lupin.
"Thank you, no."
"You're wrong, Doudeville.
These are worth smoking.
I have them from a great connoisseur, who is good enough to call himself my friend."
"Oh, may one ask ...
?"
"The Kaiser!
Come, don't look so flabbergasted, the two of you!
And tell me things: I haven't seen the papers.
What effect did my escape have on the public?"
"Tremendous, governor!"
"What was the police version?"
"Your flight took place at Garches, during an attempt to reënact the murder of Altenheim.
Unfortunately, the journalists have proved that it was impossible."
"After that?"
"After that, a general fluster.
People wondering, laughing and enjoying themselves like mad."
"Weber?"
"Weber is badly let in."
"Apart from that, no news at the detective-office?
Nothing discovered about the murderer?
No clue to help us to establish Altenheim's identity?"
"No."
"What fools they are! And to think that we pay millions a year to keep those people. If this sort of thing goes on, I shall refuse to pay my rates. Take a seat and a pen.
I will dictate a letter which you must hand in to the Grand Journal this evening.
The world has been waiting for news of me long enough.
It must be gasping with impatience.
Write."
He dictated:
"To the Editor of the Grand Journal:
"Sir,
"I must apologize to your readers for disappointing their legitimate impatience.
"I have escaped from prison and I cannot possibly reveal how I escaped.
In the same way, since my escape, I have discovered the famous secret and I cannot possibly disclose what the secret is nor how I discovered it.
"All this will, some day or other, form the subject of a rather original story which my biographer-in-ordinary will publish from my notes.
It will form a page of the history of France which our grandchildren will read with interest.
"For the moment, I have more important matters to attend to.
Disgusted at seeing into what hands the functions which I once exercised have fallen, tired of finding the Kesselbach-Altenheim case still dragging along, I am discharging M. Weber and resuming the post of honor which I occupied with such distinction and to the general satisfaction under the name of M. Lenormand.
"I am, Sir,
"Your obedient servant.
"Arsène Lupin,
"Chief of the Detective-service."
At eight o'clock in the evening, Arsène Lupin and Jean Doudeville walked into Caillard's, the fashionable restaurant, Lupin in evening-clothes, but dressed like an artist, with rather wide trousers and a rather loose tie, and Doudeville in a frock-coat, with the serious air and appearance of a magistrate.
They sat down in that part of the restaurant which is set back and divided from the big room by two columns.
A head-waiter, perfectly dressed and supercilious in manner, came to take their orders, note-book in hand.
Lupin selected the dinner with the nice thought of an accomplished epicure:
"Certainly," he said, "the prison ordinary was quite acceptable; but, all the same, it is nice to have a carefully-ordered meal."
He ate with a good appetite and silently, contenting himself with uttering, from time to time, a short sentence that marked his train of thought:
"Of course, I shall manage ... but it will be a hard job... Such an adversary! ... What staggers me is that, after six months' fighting, I don't even know what he wants!
... His chief accomplice is dead, we are near the end of the battle and yet, even now, I can't understand his game... What is the wretch after?
... My own plan is quite clear: to lay hands on the grand-duchy, to shove a grand-duke of my own making on the throne, to give him Geneviève for a wife ... and to reign.
That is what I call lucid, honest and fair.
But he, the low fellow, the ghost in the dark: what is he aiming at?"
He called:
"Waiter!"
The head-waiter came up:
"Yes, sir?"
"Cigars."
The head-waiter stalked away, returned and opened a number of boxes.
"Which do you recommend?"
"These Upmanns are very good, sir."
Lupin gave Doudeville an Upmann, took one for himself and cut it.
The head-waiter struck a match and held if for him.
With a sudden movement, Lupin caught him by the wrist:
"Not a word...
I know you...
Your real name is Dominique Lecas!"
The man, who was big and strong, tried to struggle away.
He stifled a cry of pain: Lupin had twisted his wrist.
"Your name is Dominique ... you live in the Rue de la Pompe, on the fourth floor, where you retired with a small fortune acquired in the service - listen to me, you fool, will you, or I'll break every bone in your body!
- acquired in the service of Baron Altenheim, at whose house you were butler."
The other stood motionless, his face pallid with fear.
Around them, the small room was empty.
In the restaurant beside it, three gentlemen sat smoking and two couples were chatting over their liquors.
"You see, we are quiet ... we can talk."
"Who are you?
Who are you?"
"Don't you recollect me?
Why, think of that famous luncheon in the Villa Dupont!
... You yourself, you old flunkey, handed me the plate of cakes ... and such cakes!"
"Prince...
Prince..." stammered the other.
"Yes, yes, Prince Arsène, Prince Lupin in person... Aha, you breathe again! ... You're saying to yourself that you have nothing to fear from Lupin, isn't that it? Well, you're wrong, old chap, you have everything to fear." He took a card from his pocket and showed it to him.
"There, look, I belong to the police now.
Can't be helped: that's what we all come to in the end, all of us robber-kings and emperors of crime."
"Well?"
said the head-waiter, still greatly alarmed.
"Well, go to that customer over there, who's calling you, get him what he wants and come back to me.
And no nonsense, mind you: don't go trying to get away.
I have ten men outside, with orders to keep their eyes on you.
Be off."
The head-waiter obeyed.
Five minutes after, he returned and, standing in front of the table, with his back to the restaurant, as though discussing the quality of the cigars with his customers, he said:
"Well?
What is it?"
Lupin laid a number of hundred-franc notes in a row on the table:
"One note for each definite answer to my questions."
"Done!"
"Now then.
How many of you were there with Baron Altenheim?"
"Seven, without counting myself."
"No more?"
"No.
Once only, we picked up some workmen in Italy to make the underground passage from the Villa des Glycines, at Garches."
"Were there two underground passages?"
"Yes, one led to the Pavillon Hortense and the other branched off from the first and ran under Mrs. Kesselbach's house."
"What was the object?"
"To carry off Mrs.
Kesselbach."
"Were the two maids, Suzanne and Gertrude, accomplices?"
"Yes."
"Where are they?"
"Abroad."
"And your seven pals, those of the Altenheim gang?"
"I have left them.
They are still going on."
"Where can I find them?"
Dominique hesitated.
Lupin unfolded two notes of a thousand francs each and said:
"Your scruples do you honor, Dominique.
There's nothing for it but to swallow them like a man and answer."
Dominique replied:
"You will find them at No.
3, Route de la Revolte, Neuilly.
One of them is called the Broker."
"Capital.
And now the name, the real name of Altenheim.
Do you know it?"
"Yes, Ribeira."
"Dominique, Dominique, you're asking for trouble.
Ribeira was only an assumed name.
I asked you the real name."
"Parbury."
"That's another assumed name."
The head-waiter hesitated.
Lupin unfolded three hundred franc notes.
"Pshaw, what do I care!"
said the man.
"After all, he's dead, isn't he?
Quite dead."
"His name," said Lupin.
"His name?
The Chevalier de Malreich."
Lupin gave a jump in his chair:
"What?
What do you say?
The Chevalier - say it again - the Chevalier ...
?"
"Raoul de Malreich."
A long pause.
Lupin, with his eyes fixed before him, thought of the mad girl at Veldenz, who had died by poison: Isilda bore the same name, Malreich.
And it was the name borne by the small French noble who came to the court of Veldenz in the eighteenth century.
He resumed his questions:
"What country did this Malreich belong to?"
"He was of French origin, but born in Germany ...
I saw some papers once ... that was how I came to know his name... Oh, if he had found it out, he would have wrung my neck, I believe!"
Lupin reflected and said:
"Did he command the lot of you?"
"Yes."
"But he had an accomplice, a partner?"
"Oh hush ... hush ...
!"
The head-waiter's face suddenly expressed the most intense alarm.
Lupin noticed the same sort of terror and repulsion which he himself felt when he thought of the murderer.
"Who is he?
Have you seen him?"
"Oh, don't let us talk of that one ... it doesn't do to talk of him."
"Who is he, I'm asking you."
"He is the master ... the chief... Nobody knows him."
"But you've seen him, you.
Answer me.
Have you seen him?"
"Sometimes, in the dark ... at night.
Never by daylight.
His orders come on little scraps of paper ... or by telephone."
"His name?"
"I don't know it.
We never used to speak of him.
It was unlucky."
"He dresses in black, doesn't he?"
"Yes, in black.
He is short and slender ... with fair hair..."
"And he kills, doesn't he?"
"Yes, he kills ... he kills where another might steal a bit of bread."
His voice shook.
He entreated:
"Let us stop this ... it won't do to talk of him...
I tell you ... it's unlucky."
Lupin was silent, impressed, in spite of himself, by the man's anguish.
He sat long thinking and then rose and said to the head-waiter:
"Here, here's your money; but, if you want to live in peace, you will do well not to breathe a word of our conversation to anybody."
He left the restaurant with Doudeville and walked to the Porte Saint-Denis without speaking, absorbed in all that he had heard.
At last, he seized his companion's arm and said:
"Listen to me, Doudeville, carefully. Go to the Gare du Nord. You will get there in time to catch the Luxemburg express. Go to Veldenz, the capital of the grand-duchy of Zweibrucken-Veldenz.
At the town-hall, you will easily obtain the birth-certificate of the Chevalier de Malreich and further information about the family.
You will be back on the day after to-morrow: that will be Saturday."
"Am I to let them know at the detective-office?"
"I'll see to that.
I shall telephone that you are ill. Oh, one word more: on Saturday, meet me at twelve o'clock in a little café on the Route de la Revolte, called the Restaurant Buffalo.
Come dressed as a workman."
The next day, Lupin, wearing a short smock and a cap, went down to Neuilly and began his investigations at No. 3, Route de la Revolte.
A gateway opened into an outer yard; and here he found a huge block of workmen's dwellings, a whole series of passages and workshops, with a swarming population of artisans, women and brats.
In a few minutes, he had won the good-will of the portress, with whom he chatted for an hour on the most varied topics.
During this hour, he saw three men pass, one after the other, whose manner struck him:
"That's game," he thought, "and gamy game at that!
...
They follow one another by scent!
... Look quite respectable, of course, but with the eye of the hunted deer which knows that the enemy is all around and that every tuft, every blade of grass may conceal an ambush."
That afternoon and on the Saturday morning, he pursued his inquiries and made certain that Altenheim's seven accomplices all lived on the premises. Four of them openly followed the trade of second-hand clothes-dealers.
Two of the others sold newspapers; and the third described himself as a broker and was nicknamed accordingly.
They went in and out, one after the other, without appearing to know one another.
But, in the evening, Lupin discovered that they met in a sort of coach-house situated right at the back of the last of the yards, a place in which the Broker kept his wares piled up: old iron, broken kitchen-ranges, rusty stove-pipes ... and also, no doubt, the best part of the stolen goods.
"Come," he said, "the work is shaping nicely. I asked my cousin of Germany for a month and I believe a fortnight will be enough for my purpose.
And what I like about it is that I shall start operations with the scoundrels who made me take a header in the Seine.
My poor old Gourel, I shall revenge you at last.
And high time too!"
At twelve o'clock on Saturday, he went to the Restaurant Buffalo, a little low-ceilinged room to which brick-layers and cab-drivers resorted for their mid-day meal.
Some one came and sat down beside him:
"It's done, governor."
"Ah, is it you, Doudeville?
That's right!
I'm dying to know.
Have you the particulars?
The birth-certificate?
Quick, tell me."
"Well, it's like this: Altenheim's father and mother died abroad."
"Never mind about them."
"They left three children."
"Three?"
"Yes.
The eldest would have been thirty years old by now.
His name was Raoul de Malreich."
"That's our man, Altenheim.
Next?"
"The youngest of the children was a girl, Isilda.
The register has an entry, in fresh ink, 'Deceased.'"
"Isilda... Isilda," repeated Lupin.
"That's just what I thought: Isilda was Altenheim's sister...
I saw a look in her face which I seemed to recognize...
So that was the link between them...
But the other, the third child, or rather the second?"
"A son.
He would be twenty-six by now."
"His name?"
"Louis de Malreich."
Lupin gave a little start:
"That's it!
Louis de Malreich...
The initials L. M...
The awful and terrifying signature!
...
The murderer's name is Louis de Malreich...
He was the brother of Altenheim and the brother of Isilda and he killed both of them for fear of what they might reveal."
Lupin sat long, silent and gloomy, under the obsession, no doubt, of the mysterious being.
Doudeville objected:
"What had he to fear from his sister Isilda?
She was mad, they told me."
"Mad, yes, but capable of remembering certain details of her childhood. She must have recognized the brother with whom she grew up ... and that recollection cost her her life." And he added, "Mad! But all those people were mad... The mother was mad...
The father a dipsomaniac... Altenheim a regular brute beast... Isilda, a poor innocent ... As for the other, the murderer, he is the monster, the crazy lunatic..."
"Crazy?
Do you think so, governor?"
"Yes, crazy!
With flashes of genius, of devilish cunning and intuition, but a crack-brained fool, a madman, like all that Malreich family.
Only madmen kill and especially madmen of his stamp.
For, after all ..."
He interrupted himself; and his face underwent so great a change that Doudeville was struck by it:
"What's the matter, governor?"
"Look."
A man had entered and hung his hat - a soft, black felt hat - on a peg.
He sat down at a little table, examined the bill of fare which a waiter brought him, gave his order and waited motionless, with his body stiff and erect and his two arms crossed over the table-cloth.
And Lupin saw him full-face.
He had a lean, hard visage, absolutely smooth and pierced with two sockets in the depths of which appeared a pair of steel-gray eyes.
The skin seemed stretched from bone to bone, like a sheet of parchment, so stiff and so thick that not a hair could have penetrated through it.
And the face was dismal and dull.
No expression enlivened it.
No thought seemed to abide under that ivory forehead; and the eye-lids, entirely devoid of lashes, never flickered, which gave the eyes the fixed look of the eyes in a statue.
Lupin beckoned to one of the waiters:
"Who is that gentleman?"
"The one eating his lunch over there?"
"Yes."
"He is a customer.
He comes here two or three times a week."
"Can you tell me his name?"
"Why, yes ... Leon Massier."
"Oh!"
blurted Lupin, very excitedly.
"L. M... the same two letters ... could it be Louis de Malreich?"
He watched him eagerly. Indeed, the man's appearance agreed with Lupin's conjectures, with what he knew of him and of his hideous mode of existence.
But what puzzled him was that look of death about him: where he anticipated life and fire, where he would have expected to find the torment, the disorder, the violent facial distortion of the great accursed, he beheld sheer impassiveness.
He asked the waiter:
"What does he do?"
"I really can't say. He's a rum cove ... He's always quite alone... He never talks to anybody ... We here don't even know the sound of his voice... He points his finger at the dishes on the bill of fare which he wants...
He has finished in twenty minutes; then he pays and goes..."
"And he comes back again?"
"Every three or four days.
He's not regular."
"It's he, it cannot be any one else," said Lupin to himself.
"It's Malreich.
There he is ... breathing ... at four steps from me.
There are the hands that kill.
There is the brain that gloats upon the smell of blood.
There is the monster, the vampire!
..."
And, yet, was it possible? Lupin had ended by looking upon Malreich as so fantastic a being that he was disconcerted at seeing him in the flesh, coming, going, moving.
He could not explain to himself how the man could eat bread and meat like other men, drink beer like any one else: this man whom he had pictured as a foul beast, feeding on live flesh and sucking the blood of his victims.
"Come away, Doudeville."
"What's the matter with you, governor?
You look quite white!"
"I want air.
Come out."
Outside, he drew a deep breath, wiped the perspiration from his forehead and muttered:
"That's better.
I was stifling."
And, mastering himself, he added, "Now we must play our game cautiously and not lose sight of his tracks."
"Hadn't we better separate, governor?
Our man saw us together.
He will take less notice of us singly."
"Did he see us?"
said Lupin, pensively.
"He seems to me to see nothing, to hear nothing and to look at nothing.
What a bewildering specimen!"
And, in fact, ten minutes later, Leon Massier appeared and walked away, without even looking to see if he was followed.
He had lit a cigarette and smoked, with one of his hands behind his back, strolling along like a saunterer enjoying the sunshine and the fresh air and never suspecting that his movements could possibly be watched.
He passed through the toll-gates, skirted the fortifications, went out again through the Porte Champerret and retraced his steps along the Route de la Revolte.
Would he enter the buildings at No.
3?
Lupin eagerly hoped that he would, for that would have been a certain proof of his complicity with the Altenheim gang; but the man turned round and made for the Rue Delaizement, which he followed until he passed the Velodrome Buffalo.
On the left, opposite the cycling-track, between the public tennis-court and the booths that line the Rue Delaizement, stood a small detached villa, surrounded by a scanty garden.
Leon Massier stopped, took out his keys, opened first the gate of the garden and then the door of the house and disappeared.
Lupin crept forward cautiously. He at once noticed that the block in the Route de la Revolte stretched back as far as the garden-wall. Coming still nearer, he saw that the wall was very high and that a coach-house rested against it at the bottom of the garden.
The position of the buildings was such as to give him the certainty that his coach-house stood back to back with the coach-house in the inner yard of No.
3, which served as a lumber-room for the Broker.
Leon Massier, therefore, occupied a house adjoining the place in which the seven members of the Altenheim gang held their meetings.
Consequently, Leon Massier was, in point of fact, the supreme leader who commanded that gang; and there was evidently a passage between the two coach-houses through which he communicated with his followers.
"I was right," said Lupin.
"Leon Massier and Louis de Malreich are one and the same man.
The situation is much simpler than it was."
"There is no doubt about that," said Doudeville, "and everything will be settled in a few days."
"That is to say, I shall have been stabbed in the throat."
"What are you saying, governor?
There's an idea!"
"Pooh, who knows?
I have always had a presentiment that that monster would bring me ill-luck."
Thenceforth it became a matter of watching Malreich's life in such a way that none of his movements went unobserved. This life was of the oddest, if one could believe the people of the neighborhood whom Doudeville questioned.
"The bloke from the villa," as they called him, had been living there for a few months only.
He saw and received nobody.
He was not known to keep a servant of any kind.
And the windows, though they were left wide open, even at night, always remained dark and were never lit with the glow of a lamp or candle.
Moreover, Leon Massier most often went out at the close of day and did not come in again until very late ... at dawn, said people who had come upon him at sunrise.
"And does any one know what he does?"
asked Lupin of his companion, when they next met.
"No, he leads an absolutely irregular existence.
He sometimes disappears for several days together ... or, rather, he remains indoors.
When all is said, nobody knows anything."
"Well, we shall know; and that soon."
He was wrong. After a week of continuous efforts and investigations, he had learnt no more than before about that strange individual.
The extraordinary thing that constantly happened was this, that, suddenly, while Lupin was following him, the man, who was ambling with short steps along the streets, without ever turning round or ever stopping, the man would vanish as if by a miracle.
True, he sometimes went through houses with two entrances.
But, at other times, he seemed to fade away in the midst of the crowd, like a ghost.
And Lupin was left behind, petrified, astounded, filled with rage and confusion.
He at once hurried to the Rue Delaizement and stood on guard outside the villa.
Minutes followed upon minutes, half-hour upon half-hour.
A part of the night slipped away.
Then, suddenly, the mysterious man hove in sight.
What could he have been doing?
"An express message for you, governor," said Doudeville, at eight o'clock one evening, as he joined him in the Rue Delaizement.
Lupin opened the envelope.
Mrs. Kesselbach implored him to come to her aid.
It appeared that two men had taken up their stand under her windows, at night, and one of them had said:
"What luck, we've dazzled them completely this time!
So it's understood; we shall strike the blow to-night."
Mrs. Kesselbach thereupon went downstairs and discovered that the shutter in the pantry did not fasten, or, at least, that it could be opened from the outside.
"At last," said Lupin, "it's the enemy himself who offers to give battle.
That's a good thing!
I am tired of marching up and down under Malreich's windows."
"Is he there at this moment?"
"No, he played me one of his tricks again in Paris, just as I was about to play him one of mine. But, first of all, listen to me, Doudeville. Go and collect ten of our men and bring them to the Rue des Vignes.
Look here, bring Marco and Jérôme, the messenger.
I have given them a holiday since the business at the Palace Hotel: let them come this time.
Daddy Charolais and his son ought to be mounting guard by now.
Make your arrangements with them, and at half-past eleven, come and join me at the corner of the Rue des Vignes and the Rue Raynouard.
From there we will watch the house."
Doudeville went away.
Lupin waited for an hour longer, until that quiet thoroughfare, the Rue Delaizement, was quite deserted, and then, seeing that Leon Massier did not return, he made up his mind and went up to the villa.
There was no one in sight...
He took a run and jumped on the stone ledge that supported the railings of the garden.
A few minutes later, he was inside.
His plan was to force the door of the house and search the rooms in order to find the Emperor's letters which Malreich had stolen from Veldenz.
But he thought a visit to the coach-house of more immediate importance.
He was much surprised to see that it was open and, next, to find, by the light of his electric lantern, that it was absolutely empty and that there was no door in the back wall. He hunted about for a long time, but met with no more success.
Outside, however, he saw a ladder standing against the coach-house and obviously serving as a means of reaching a sort of loft contrived under the slate roof.
The loft was blocked with old packing-cases, trusses of straw and gardener's frames, or rather it seemed to be blocked, for he very soon discovered a gangway that took him to the wall. Here, he knocked up against a cucumber-frame, which he tried to move.
Failing to effect his purpose, he examined the frame more closely and found, first, that it was fixed to the wall and, secondly, that one of the panes was missing.
He passed his arm through and encountered space.
He cast the bright light of the lantern through the aperture and saw a big shed, a coach-house larger than that of the villa and filled with old iron-work and objects of every kind.
"That's it," said Lupin to himself. "This window has been contrived in the Broker's lumber-room, right up at the top, and from here Louis de Malreich sees, hears and watches his accomplices, without being seen or heard by them.
I now understand how it is that they do not know their leader."
Having found out what he wanted, he put out his light and was on the point of leaving, when a door opened opposite him, down below. Some one came in and lit a lamp. He recognized the Broker.
He thereupon resolved to stay where he was, since the expedition, after all, could not be done so long as that man was there.
The Broker took two revolvers from his pocket.
He tested the triggers and changed the cartridges, whistling a music-hall tune as he did so.
An hour elapsed in this way.
Lupin was beginning to grow restless, without, however, making up his mind to go.
More minutes passed, half an hour, an hour...
At last, the man said aloud:
"Come in."
One of the scoundrels slipped into the shed; and, one after the other, a third arrived and a fourth...
"We are all here," said the Broker.
"Dieudonne and Chubby will meet us down there.
Come, we've no time to lose... Are you armed?"
"To the teeth."
"That's all right.
It'll be hot work."
"How do you know, Broker?"
"I've seen the chief...
When I say that I've seen him, no ... but he spoke to me..."
"Yes," said one of the men, "in the dark, at a street-corner, as usual.
Ah, Altenheim's ways were better than that.
At least, one knew what one was doing."
"And don't you know?"
retorted the Broker.
"We're breaking in at the Kesselbach woman's."
"And what about the two watchers?
The two coves whom Lupin posted there?"
"That's their look-out: there's seven of us.
They had better give us as little trouble as possible."
"What about the Kesselbach?"
"Gag her first, then bind her and bring her here...
There, on that old sofa... And then wait for orders."
"Is the job well paid?"
"The Kesselbach's jewels to begin with."
"Yes, if it comes off ... but I'm speaking of the certainty."
"Three hundred-franc notes apiece, beforehand, and twice as much again afterwards."
"Have you the money?"
"Yes."
"That's all right.
You can say what you like, but, as far as paying goes, there's no one to equal that bloke."
And, in a voice so low that Lupin could hardly hear, "I say, Broker, if we're obliged to use the knife, is there a reward?"
"The same as usual, two thousand."
"If it's Lupin?"
"Three thousand."
"Oh, if we could only get him!"
One after the other, they left the lumber-room.
Lupin heard the Broker's parting words:
"This is the plan of attack.
We divide into three lots.
A whistle; and every one runs forward..."
Lupin hurriedly left his hiding-place, went down the ladder, ran round the house, without going in, and climbed back over the railings:
"The Broker's right; it'll be hot work... Ah, it's my skin they're after!
A reward for Lupin!
The rascals!"
He passed through the toll-gate and jumped into a taxi:
"Rue Raynouard."
He stopped the cab at two hundred yards from the Rue des Vignes and walked to the corner of the two streets.
To his great surprise, Doudeville was not there.
"That's funny," said Lupin.
"It's past twelve...
This business looks suspicious to me."
He waited ten minutes, twenty minutes.
At half-past twelve, nobody had arrived.
Further delay was dangerous.
After all, if Doudeville and his men were prevented from coming, Charolais, his son and he, Lupin, himself were enough to repel the attack, without counting the assistance of the servants.
He therefore went ahead.
But he caught sight of two men who tried to hide in the shadow of a corner wall.
"Hang it!"
he said.
"That's the vanguard of the gang, Dieudonne and Chubby.
I've allowed myself to be out-distanced, like a fool."
Here he lost more time. Should he go straight up to them, disable them and then climb into the house through the pantry-window, which he knew to be unlocked?
That would be the most prudent course and would enable him, moreover, to take Mrs. Kesselbach away at once and to remove her to a place of safety.
Yes, but it also meant the failure of his plan; it meant missing this glorious opportunity of trapping the whole gang, including Louis de Malreich himself, without doubt.
Suddenly a whistle sounded from somewhere on the other side of the house.
Was it the rest of the gang, so soon?
And was an offensive movement to be made from the garden?
But, at the preconcerted signal, the two men climbed through the window and disappeared from view.
Lupin scaled the balcony at a bound and jumped into the pantry.
By the sound of their footsteps, he judged that the assailants had gone into the garden; and the sound was so distinct that he felt easy in his mind: Charolais and his son could not fail to hear the noise.
He therefore went upstairs.
Mrs. Kesselbach's bedroom was on the first landing.
He walked in without knocking.
A night-light was burning in the room; and he saw Dolores, on a sofa, fainting.
He ran up to her, lifted her and, in a voice of command, forcing her to answer:
"Listen... Charolais?
His son ... Where are they?"
She stammered:
"Why, what do you mean?
...
They're gone, of course!
..."
"What, gone?"
"You sent me word ... an hour ago ... a telephone-message..."
He picked up a piece of blue paper lying beside her and read:
"Send the two watchers away at once ... and all my men... Tell them to meet me at the Grand Hotel.
Have no fear."
"Thunder!
And you believed it?
...
But your servants?"
"Gone."
He went up to the window.
Outside, three men were coming from the other end of the garden.
From the window in the next room, which looked out on the street, he saw two others, on the pavement.
And he thought of Dieudonne, of Chubby, of Louis de Malreich, above all, who must now be prowling around, invisible and formidable.
"Hang it!"
he muttered.
"I half believe they've done me this time!"
At that moment, Arsène Lupin felt the impression, the certainty, that he had been drawn into an ambush, by means which he had not the time to perceive, but of which he guessed the prodigious skill and address.
Everything had been calculated, everything ordained; the dismissal of his men, the disappearance or treachery of the servants, his own presence in Mrs. Kesselbach's house.
Clearly, the whole thing had succeeded, exactly as the enemy wished, thanks to circumstances almost miraculously fortunate; for, after all, he might have arrived before the false message had sent his friends away. But then there would have been a battle between his own gang and the Altenheim gang.
And Lupin, remembering Malreich's conduct, the murder of Altenheim, the poisoning of the mad girl at Veldenz, Lupin asked himself whether the ambush was aimed at him alone or whether Malreich had not contemplated the possibility of a general scuffle, involving the killing of accomplices who had by this time become irksome to him.
It was an intuition, rather, a fleeting idea, that just passed through his mind.
The hour was one for action.
He must defend Dolores, the abduction of whom was, in all likelihood, the first and foremost reason of the attack.
He half-opened the casement window on the street and levelled his revolver.
A shot, rousing and alarming the neighborhood, and the scoundrels would take to their heels.
"Well, no," he muttered, "no!
It shall not be said that I shirked the fight.
The opportunity is too good... And, then, who says that they would run away!
...
There are too many of them to care about the neighbors."
He returned to Dolores' room.
There was a noise downstairs.
He listened and, finding that it came from the staircase, he locked the door.
Dolores was crying and throwing herself about the sofa.
He implored her:
"Are you strong enough?
We are on the first floor.
I could help you down.
We can lower the sheets from the window..."
"No, no, don't leave me...
I am frightened...
I haven't the strength ... they will kill me... Oh, protect me!"
He took her in his arms and carried her to the next room.
And, bending over her:
"Don't move; and keep calm.
I swear to you that not one of those men shall touch you, as long as I am alive."
The door of the first room was tried.
Dolores, clinging to him with all her might, cried:
"Oh, there they are!
There they are!
...
They will kill you ... you are alone!
..."
Eagerly, he said:
"No, I am not alone... You are here... You are here beside me..."
He tried to release himself.
She took his head in her two hands, looked him deep in the eyes and whispered:
"Where are you going?
What are you going to do?
No ... you must not die...
I won't have it ... you must live ... you must."
She stammered words which he did not catch and which she seemed to stifle between her lips lest he should hear them; and, having spent all her energy, exhausted, she fell back unconscious.
He leant over her and gazed at her for a moment.
Softly, lightly, he pressed a kiss upon her hair.
Then he went back to the first room, carefully closed the door between the two and switched on the electric light.
"One second, my lads!"
he cried.
"You seem in a great hurry to get yourselves smashed to pieces!
... Don't you know that Lupin's here?
I'll make you dance!"
While speaking, he unfolded a screen in such a way as to hide the sofa on which Mrs. Kesselbach had been lying; and he now spread dresses and coverings over it.
The door was on the point of giving way under the blows of the men outside.
"Here I am!
Coming!
Are you ready?
Now, gentlemen, one at a time!
..."
He briskly turned the key and drew the bolt.
Shouts, threats, a roar of infuriated animals came through the open doorway.
Yet none of them dared come forward.
Before rushing at Lupin, they hesitated, seized with alarm, with fear...
This was what he had reckoned on.
Standing in the middle of the room, full in the light, with outstretched arm, he held between his fingers a sheaf of bank-notes, which he divided, counting them one by one, into seven equal shares.
And he calmly said:
"Three thousand francs' reward for each of you, if Lupin is sent to his last account?
That's what you were promised, isn't it?
Here's double the money!"
He laid the bundles on the table, within reach of the scoundrels.
The Broker roared:
"Humbug!
He's trying to gain time.
Shoot him down!"
He raised his arm.
His companions held him back.
And Lupin continued:
"Of course, this need not affect your plan of campaign.
You came here, first, to kidnap Mrs. Kesselbach and, secondly, to lay hands on her jewels.
Far be it from me to interfere with your laudable intentions!"
"Look here, what are you driving at?"
growled the Broker, listening in spite of himself.
"Aha, Broker, I'm beginning to interest you, am I? ... Come in, old chap... Come in, all of you... There's a draught at the top of those stairs ... and such pretty fellows as you mustn't run the risk of catching cold... What, are we afraid?
Why, I'm all by myself! ...
Come, pull yourselves together, my lambs!"
They entered the room, puzzled and suspicious.
"Shut the door, Broker ... we shall be more comfortable.
Thanks, old man.
Oh, by the way, I see the notes are gone.
Therefore we're agreed.
How easy it is for honest men to come to terms!"
"Well ... and next?"
"Next?
Well, as we're partners ..."
"Partners?"
"Why, haven't you accepted my money?
We're working together, old man, and we will carry off the young woman together first and carry off the jewels after."
The Broker grinned:
"Don't want you for that."
"Yes, you do, old man."
"Why?"
"Because you don't know where the jewels are hidden and I do."
"We'll find out."
"To-morrow.
Not to-night."
"Well, let's hear.
What do you want?"
"My share of the jewels."
"Why didn't you take the lot, as you know where they are?"
"Can't get at them by myself.
There's a way of doing it, but I don't know it.
You're here, so I'm making use of you."
The Broker hesitated:
"Share the jewels... Share the jewels... A few bits of glass and brass, most likely..."
"You fool!
...
There's more than a million's worth."
The men quivered under the impression made upon them.
"Very well," said the Broker.
"But suppose the Kesselbach gets away?
She's in the next room, isn't she?"
"No, she's in here."
Lupin for a moment pulled back one of the leaves of the screen, revealing the heap of dresses and bed-clothes which he had laid out on the sofa:
"She's here, fainting.
But I shan't give her up till we've divided."
"Still ..."
"You can take it or leave it.
I don't care if I am alone.
You know what I'm good for.
So please yourselves..."
The men consulted with one another and the Broker said:
"Where is the hiding-place you're talking of?"
"Under the fireplace.
But, when you don't know the secret, you must first lift up the whole chimneypiece, looking-glass, marble and all in a lump, it seems.
It's no easy job."
"Pooh, we're a smart lot, we are!
Just you wait and see.
In five minutes ..."
He gave his orders and his pals at once set to work with admirable vigor and discipline. Two of them, standing on chairs, tried to lift the mirror. The four others attacked the fireplace itself.
The Broker, on his knees, kept his eyes on the hearth and gave the word of command:
"Cheerily, lads!
...
Altogether, if you please!
... Look out!
... One, two ... ah, there, it's moving!
..."
Standing behind them, with his hands in his pockets, Lupin watched them affectionately and, at the same time, revelled with all his pride, as an artist and master, in this striking proof of his authority, of his might, of the incredible sway which he wielded over others.
How could those scoundrels for a second accept that improbable story and lose all sense of things, to the point of relinquishing every chance of the fight in his favor?
He took from his pockets two great massive and formidable revolvers and, calmly, choosing the first two men whom he would bring down and the two who would fall next, he aimed as he might have aimed at a pair of targets in a rifle-gallery.
Two shots together and two more...
Loud yells of pain... Four men came tumbling down, one after the other, like dolls at a cockshy.
"Four from seven leaves three," said Lupin.
"Shall I go on?"
His arms remained outstretched, levelled at the Broker and his two pals.
"You swine!"
growled the Broker, feeling for a weapon.
"Hands up," cried Lupin, "or I fire!
... That's it... Now, you two, take away his toys...
If not ...
!"
The two scoundrels, shaking with fear, caught hold of their leader and compelled him to submit.
"Bind him!
... Bind him, confound it!
... What difference does it make to you?
... Once I'm gone, you're all free... Come along, have you finished?
The wrists first ... with your belts... And the ankles...
Hurry up!
..."
The Broker, beaten and disabled, made no further resistance.
While his pals were binding him, Lupin stooped over them and dealt them two terrific blows on the head with the butt-end of his revolver.
They sank down in a heap.
"That's a good piece of work," he said, taking breath.
"Pity there are not another fifty of them.
I was just in the mood... And all so easily done ... with a smile on one's face... What do you think of it, Broker?"
The scoundrel lay cursing.
Lupin said:
"Cheer up, old man!
Console yourself with the thought that you are helping in a good action, the rescue of Mrs. Kesselbach.
She will thank you in person for your gallantry."
He went to the door of the second room and opened it:
"What's this?"
he said, stopping on the threshold, taken aback, dumfounded.
The room was empty.
He went to the window, saw a ladder leaning against the balcony, a telescopic steel ladder, and muttered:
"Kidnapped ... kidnapped ... Louis de Malreich... Oh, the villain!
..."
He reflected for a minute, trying to master his anguish of mind, and said to himself that, after all, as Mrs. Kesselbach seemed to be in no immediate danger, there was no cause for alarm.
But he was seized with a sudden fit of rage and flew at the seven scoundrels, gave a kick or two to those of the wounded who stirred, felt for his bank-notes and put them back in his pocket, then gagged the men's mouths and tied their hands with anything that he could find &#8212; blind-cords, curtain-loops, blankets and sheets reduced to strips &#8212; and, lastly, laid in a row on the carpet, in front of the sofa, seven bundles of humanity, packed tight together and tied up like so many parcels:
"Mummies on toast!" he chuckled. "A dainty dish for those who like that sort of thing! ... You pack of fools, how does this suit you, eh? There you are, like corpses at the Morgue... Serves you right for attacking Lupin, Lupin the protector of the widow and orphan!
... Are you trembling?
Quite unnecessary, my lambs!
Lupin never hurt a fly yet! ...
Only, Lupin is a decent man, he can't stand vermin; and the Lupin knows his duty.
I ask you, is life possible with a lot of scamps like you about?
Think of it: no respect for other people's lives; no respect for property, for laws, for society; no conscience; no anything!
What are we coming to?
Lord, what are we coming to?"
Without even taking the trouble to lock them in, he left the room, went down the street and walked until he came to his taxi.
He sent the driver in search of another and brought both cabs back to Mrs. Kesselbach's house.
A good tip, paid in advance, avoided all tedious explanations.
With the help of the two men, he carried the seven prisoners down and plumped them anyhow, on one another's knees, into the cabs.
The wounded men yelled and moaned.
He shut the doors, shouting:
"Mind your hands!"
He got up beside the driver of the front cab.
"Where to?"
asked the man.
"36, Quai des Orfevers: the detective-office."
The motors throbbed, the drivers started the gear and the strange procession went scooting down the slopes of the Trocadero.
In the streets, they passed a few vegetable-carts.
Men carrying long poles were turning out the street-lamps.
There were stars in the sky.
A cool breeze was wafted through the air.
Lupin sang aloud:
The Place de la Concorde, the Louvre...
In the distance, the dark bulk of Notre Dame...
He turned round and half opened the door:
"Having a good time, mates?
So am I, thank you.
It's a grand night for a drive and the air's delicious!
..."
They were now bumping over the ill-paved quays.
And soon they arrived at the Palais de Justice and the door of the detective-office.
"Wait here," said Lupin to the two drivers, "and be sure you look after your seven fares."
He crossed the outer yard and went down the passage on the right leading to the rooms of the central office.
He found the night inspectors on duty.
"A bag, gentlemen," he said, as he entered, "a fine bag too.
Is M. Weber here?
I am the new commissary of police for Auteuil."
"M. Weber is in his flat.
Do you want him sent for?"
"Just one second.
I'm in a hurry.
I'll leave a line for him."
He sat down at a table and wrote:
"My dear Weber,
"I am bringing you the seven scoundrels composing Altenheim's gang, the men who killed Gourel (and plenty of others) and who killed me as well, under the name of M. Lenormand.
"That only leaves their leader unaccounted for.
I am going to effect his arrest this minute.
Come and join me.
He lives in the Rue Delaizement, at Neuilly and goes by the name of Leon Massier.
"Kind regards.
"Yours,
"Ars&#232;ne Lupin,
"Chief of the Detective-service."
He sealed the letter:
"Give that to M. Weber.
It's urgent.
Now I want seven men to receive the goods.
I left them on the quay."
On going back to the taxis, he was met by a chief inspector:
"Ah, it's you M.
Leb&#339;uf!"
he said.
"I've made a fine haul...
The whole of Altenheim's gang...
They're there in the taxi-cabs."
"Where did you find them?"
"Hard at work kidnapping Mrs. Kesselbach and robbing her house.
But I'll tell you all about it when the time comes."
The chief inspector took him aside and, with the air of surprise:
"I beg your pardon, monsieur, but I was sent for to see the commissary of police for Auteuil.
And I don't seem to ...
Whom have I the honor of addressing?"
"Somebody who is making you a handsome present of seven hooligans of the finest quality."
"Still, I should like to know..."
"My name?"
"Yes."
"Ars&#232;ne Lupin."
He nimbly tripped the chief inspector up, ran to the Rue de Rivoli, jumped into a passing taxi-cab and drove to the Porte des Ternes.
The Route de la Revolte was close by.
He went to No.
3.
For all his coolness and self-command, Ars&#232;ne Lupin was unable to control his excitement.
Would he find Dolores Kesselbach?
Had Louis de Malreich taken her either to his own place or to the Broker's shed?
Lupin had taken the key of the shed from the Broker, so that it was easy for him, after ringing and walking across the different yards, to open the door and enter the lumber-shop.
He switched on his lantern and took his bearings.
A little to the right was the free space in which he had seen the accomplices hold their last confabulation.
On the sofa mentioned by the Broker he saw a black figure, Dolores lay wrapped in blankets and gagged.
He helped her up.
"Ah, it's you, it's you!"
she stammered.
"They haven't touched you!"
And, rising and pointing to the back of the shop:
"There ... he went out that side ...
I heard him...
I am sure... You must go ...
please!"
"I must get you away first," he said.
"No, never mind me ... go after him...
I entreat you... Strike him!"
Fear, this time, instead of dejecting her, seemed to be giving her unwonted strength; and she repeated, with an immense longing to place her terrible enemy in his power:
"Go after him first...
I can't go on living like this... You must save me from him...
I can't go on living..."
He unfastened her bonds, laid her carefully on the sofa and said:
"You are right...
Besides, you have nothing to fear here...
Wait for me, I shall come back."
As he was going away, she caught hold of his hand:
"But you yourself?"
"Well?"
"If that man ..."
It was as though she dreaded for Lupin the great, final contest to which she was exposing him and as though, at the last moment, she would have been glad to hold him back.
He said:
"Thank you, have no fear.
What have I to be afraid of?
He is alone."
And, leaving her, he went to the back of the shed. As he expected, he found a ladder standing against the wall which brought him to the level of the little window through which he had watched the scoundrels hold their meeting.
It was the way by which Malreich had returned to his house in the Rue Delaizement.
He, therefore, took the same road, just as he had done a few hours earlier, climbed into the loft of the other coach-house and down into the garden.
He found himself at the back of the villa occupied by Malreich.
Strange to say, he did not doubt, for a moment that Malreich was there.
He would meet him inevitably; the formidable battle which they were waging against each other was nearing its end.
A few minutes more and, one way or another, all would be over.
He was amazed, on grasping the handle of a door, to find that the handle turned and the door opened under his pressure.
The villa was not even locked.
He passed through a kitchen, a hall and up a staircase; and he walked deliberately, without seeking to deaden the sound of his footsteps.
On the landing, he stopped.
The perspiration streamed from his forehead; and his temples throbbed under the rush of his blood.
Nevertheless, he remained calm, master of himself and conscious of his least thoughts.
He laid two revolvers on a stair:
"No weapons," he said to himself.
"My hands only, just the effort of my two hands... That's quite enough... That will be better..."
Opposite him were three doors. He chose the middle one, turned the handle and encountered no obstacle. He went in.
There was no light in the room, but the rays of the night entered through the wide-open window and, amid the darkness, he saw the sheets and the white curtains of the bed.
And somebody was standing beside it.
He savagely cast the gleam of his lantern upon that form.
Malreich!
The pallid face of Malreich, his dim eyes, his cadaverous cheek-bones, his scraggy neck...
And all this stood motionless, opposite him, at five steps' distance; and he could not have said whether that dull face, that death-face, expressed the least terror or even a grain of anxiety.
Lupin took a step forward ... and a second ... and a third...
The man did not move.
Did he see?
Did he understand?
It was as though the man's eyes were gazing into space and that he thought himself possessed by an hallucination, rather than looking upon a real image.
One more step...
"He will defend himself," thought Lupin, "he is bound to defend himself."
And Lupin thrust out his arms.
The man did not make a movement.
He did not retreat; his eyelids did not blink.
The contact took place.
And it was Lupin, scared and bewildered, who lost his head.
He knocked the man back upon his bed, stretched him at full length, rolled him in the sheets, bound him in the blankets and held him under his knee, like a prey ... whereas the man had not made the slightest movement of resistance.
"Ah!"
shouted Lupin, drunk with delight and satisfied hatred.
"At last I have crushed you, you odious brute!
At last I am the master!"
He heard a noise outside, in the Rue Delaizement; men knocking at the gate.
He ran to the window and cried:
"Is that you, Weber?
Already?
Well done!
You are a model servant!
Break down the gate, old chap, and come up here; delighted to see you!"
In a few minutes, he searched his prisoner's clothes, got hold of his pocket-book, cleared the papers out of the drawers of the desk and the davenport, flung them on the table and went through them.
He gave a shout of joy: the bundle of letters was there, the famous bundle of letters which he had promised to restore to the Emperor.
He put back the papers in their place and went to the window:
"It's all finished, Weber!
You can come in!
You will find Mr. Kesselbach's murderer in his bed, all ready tied up... Good-bye, Weber!"
And Lupin, tearing down the stairs, ran to the coach-house and went back to Dolores Kesselbach, while Weber was breaking into the villa.
Single-handed, he had arrested Altenheim's seven companions!
And he had delivered to justice the mysterious leader of the gang, the infamous monster, Louis de Malreich!
A young man sat writing at a table on a wide wooden balcony.
From time to time, he raised his head and cast a vague glance toward the horizon of hills, where the trees, stripped by the autumn, were shedding their last leaves over the red roofs of the villas and the lawns of the gardens.
Then he went on writing.
Presently he took up his paper and read aloud:
Nos jours s'en vont à la dérive,
Comme emportés par un courant
Qui les pousse vers une rive
Où l'on n'aborde qu'en mourant.
Our days go by, adrift, adrift,
Borne along by current swift
That urges them toward the strand
Where not until we die, we land.
"Not so bad," said a voice behind him.
"Mme.
Amable Tastu might have written that, or Mrs. Felicia Hemans.
However, we can't all be Byrons or Lamartines!"
"You!
... You!
..." stammered the young man, in dismay.
"Yes, I, poet, I myself, Arsène Lupin come to see his dear friend Pierre Leduc."
Pierre Leduc began to shake, as though shivering with fever.
He asked, in a low voice:
"Has the hour come?"
"Yes, my dear Pierre Leduc: the hour has come for you to give up, or rather to interrupt the slack poet's life which you have been leading for months at the feet of Geneviève Ernemont and Mrs. Kesselbach and to perform the part which I have allotted to you in my play ... oh, a fine play, I assure you, thoroughly well-constructed, according to all the canons of art, with top notes, comic relief and gnashing of teeth galore!
We have reached the fifth act; the grand finale is at hand; and you, Pierre Leduc, are the hero.
There's fame for you!"
The young man rose from his seat:
"And suppose I refuse?"
"Idiot!"
"Yes, suppose I refuse?
After all, what obliges me to submit to your will?
What obliges me to accept a part which I do not know, but which I loathe in advance and feel ashamed of?"
"Idiot!"
repeated Lupin.
And forcing Pierre Leduc back into his chair, he sat down beside him and, in the gentlest of voices:
"You quite forget, my dear young man, that you are not Pierre Leduc, but Gérard Baupré.
That you bear the beautiful name of Pierre Leduc is due to the fact that you, Gérard Baupré, killed Pierre Leduc and robbed him of his individuality."
The young man bounded with indignation:
"You are mad!
You know as well as I do that you conceived the whole plot..."
"Yes, I know that, of course; but the law doesn't know it; and what will the law say when I come forward with proof that the real Pierre Leduc died a violent death and that you have taken his place?"
The young man, overwhelmed with consternation, stammered:
"No one will believe you... Why should I have done that?
With what object?"
"Idiot!
The object is so self-evident that Weber himself could have perceived it.
You lie when you say that you will not accept a part which you do not know.
You know your part quite well.
It is the part which Pierre Leduc would have played were he not dead."
"But Pierre Leduc, to me, to everybody, was only a name.
Who was he?
Who am I?"
"What difference can that make to you?"
"I want to know.
I want to know what I am doing!"
"And, if you know, will you go straight ahead?"
"Yes, if the object of which you speak is worth it."
"If it were not, do you think I would take all this trouble?"
"Who am I?
Whatever my destiny, you may be sure that I shall prove worthy of it.
But I want to know.
Who am I?"
Arsène Lupin took off his hat, bowed and said: "Hermann IV., Grand-duke of Zweibrucken-Veldenz, Prince of Berncastel, Elector of Treves and lord of all sorts of places."
Three days later, Arsène Lupin took Mrs. Kesselbach away in a motor-car in the direction of the frontier.
The journey was accomplished in silence, Lupin remembered with emotion Dolores's terrified conduct and the words which she spoke in the house in the Rue des Vignes, when he was about to defend her against Altenheim's accomplices.
And she must have remembered also, for she remained embarrassed and evidently perturbed in his presence.
In the evening they reached a small castle, all covered with creepers and flowers, roofed with an enormous slate cap and standing in a large garden full of ancestral trees.
Here Mrs. Kesselbach found Geneviève already installed, after a visit to the neighboring town, where she had engaged a staff of servants from among the country-people.
"This will be your residence, madame," said Lupin.
"You are at Bruggen Castle.
You will be quite safe here, while waiting the outcome of these events.
I have written to Pierre Leduc and he will be your guest from to-morrow."
He started off again at once, drove to Veldenz and handed over to Count von Waldemar the famous letters which he had recaptured:
"You know my conditions, my dear Waldemar," said Lupin.
"The first and most important thing is to restore the House of Zweibrucken-Veldenz and to reinstate the Grand-duke Hermann IV., in the grand-duchy."
"I shall open negotiations with the Council of Regency to-day.
According to my information, it will not be a difficult matter.
But this Grand-duke Hermann..."
"His Royal Highness is at present staying at Bruggen Castle, under the name of Pierre Leduc.
I will supply all the necessary proofs of his identity."
That same evening, Lupin took the road back to Paris, with the intention of actively hurrying on the trial of Malreich and the seven scoundrels.
It would be wearisome to recapitulate the story of the case: the facts, down to the smallest details, are in the memory of one and all.
It was one of those sensational events which still form a subject of conversation and discussion among the weather-beaten laborers in the remotest villages.
But what I wish to recall is the enormous part played by Lupin in the conduct of the case and in the incidents appertaining to the preliminary inquiry. As a matter of fact, it was he who managed the inquiry.
From the very start, he took the place of the authorities, ordering police-searches, directing the measures to be taken, prescribing the questions to be put to the prisoners, assuming the responsibility for everything.
We can all remember the universal amazement when, morning after morning, we read in the papers those letters, so irresistible in their masterly logic, signed, by turns:
"ARSÈNE LUPIN, Examining-magistrate."
"ARSÈNE LUPIN, Public Prosecutor."
"ARSÈNE LUPIN, Minister of Justice."
"ARSÈNE LUPIN, Copper."
He flung himself into the business with a spirit, an ardor, a violence, even, that was astonishing in one usually so full of light-hearted chaff and, when all was said, so naturally disposed by temperament to display a certain professional indulgence.
No, this time he was prompted by hatred.
He hated Louis de Malreich, that bloodthirsty scoundrel, that foul brute, of whom he had always been afraid and who, even beaten, even in prison, still gave him that sensation of dread and repugnance which one feels at the sight of a reptile.
Besides, had not Malreich had the audacity to persecute Dolores?
"He has played and lost," said Lupin.
"He shall pay for it with his head."
That was what he wanted for his terrible enemy: the scaffold, the bleak, dull morning when the blade of the guillotine slides down and kills...
It was a strange prisoner whom the examining-magistrate questioned for months on end between the four walls of his room, a strange figure, that bony man, with the skeleton face and the lifeless eyes!
He seemed quite out of himself.
His thoughts were not there, but elsewhere.
And he cared so little about answering!
"My name is Leon Massier."
That was the one sentence to which he confined himself.
And Lupin retorted.
"You lie.
Leon Massier, born at Perigueux, left fatherless at the age of ten, died seven years ago.
You took his papers.
But you forgot his death-certificate.
Here it is."
And Lupin sent a copy of the document to the public prosecutor.
"I am Leon Massier," declared the prisoner, once again.
"You lie," replied Lupin. "You are Louis de Malreich, the last surviving descendant of a small French noble who settled in Germany in the eighteenth century. You had a brother who called himself Parbury, Ribeira and Altenheim, by turns: you killed your brother.
You had a sister, Isilda de Malreich: you killed your sister."
"I am Leon Massier."
"You lie.
You are Malreich.
Here is your birth-certificate.
Here are your brother's and your sister's."
And Lupin sent the three certificates.
Apart from the question of his identity, Malreich, crushed, no doubt, by the accumulation of proofs brought up against him, did not defend himself. What could he say?
They had forty notes written in his own hand - a comparison of the handwritings established the fact - written in his own hand to the gang of his accomplices, forty notes which he had omitted to tear up after taking them back.
And all these notes were orders relating to the Kesselbach case, the capture of M. Lenormand and Gourel, the pursuit of old Steinweg, the construction of the underground passages at Garches and so on.
What possibility was there of a denial?
One rather odd thing baffled the law officers. The seven scoundrels, when confronted with their leader, all declared that they did not know him, because they had never seen him.
They received his instructions either by telephone, or else in the dark, by means of those same little notes which Malreich slipped into their hands without a word.
But, for the rest, was not the existence of the communication between the villa in the Rue Delaizement and the Broker's shed an ample proof of complicity?
From that spot, Malreich saw and heard.
From that spot, the leader watched his men.
Discrepancies? Apparently irreconcilable facts? Lupin explained them all away.
In a celebrated article, published on the morning of the trial, he took up the case from the start, revealed what lay beneath it, unravelled its web, showed Malreich, unknown to all, living in the room of his brother, the sham Major Parbury, passing unseen along the passages of the Palace Hotel and murdering Mr. Kesselbach, murdering Beudot the floor-waiter, murdering Chapman the secretary.
The trial lingers in the memory.
It was both terrifying and gloomy: terrifying because of the atmosphere of anguish that hung over the crowd of onlookers and the recollection of crime and blood that obsessed their minds: gloomy, heavy, darksome, stifling because of the tremendous silence observed by the prisoner.
Not a protest, not a movement, not a word. A face of wax that neither saw nor heard. An awful vision of impassive calmness! The people in court shuddered.
Their distraught imaginations conjured up a sort of supernatural being rather than a man, a sort of genie out of the Arabian Nights, one of those Hindu gods who symbolize all that is ferocious, cruel, sanguinary and pernicious.
As for the other scoundrels, the people did not even look at them, treated them as insignificant supers overshadowed by that stupendous leader.
The most sensational evidence was that given by Mrs. Kesselbach.
To the general astonishment and to Lupin's own surprise, Dolores, who had answered none of the magistrate's summonses and who had retired to an unknown spot, Dolores appeared, a sorrow-stricken widow, to give damning evidence against her husband's murderer.
She gazed at him for many seconds and then said, simply:
"That is the man who entered my house in the Rue des Vignes, who carried me off and who locked me up in the Broker's shed.
I recognize him."
"On your oath?"
"I swear it before God and man."
Two days later, Louis de Malreich, alias Leon Massier was sentenced to death.
And his overpowering personality may be said to have absorbed that of his accomplices to such an extent that they received the benefit of extenuating circumstances.
"Louis de Malreich have you nothing to say?"
asked the presiding judge.
He made no reply.
One question alone remained undecided in Lupin's eyes: why had Malreich committed all those crimes?
What did he want?
What was his object?
Lupin was soon to understand; and the day was not far off when, gasping with horror, struck, mortally smitten with despair, he would know the awful truth.
For the moment, although the thought of it constantly hovered over his mind, he ceased to occupy himself with the Malreich case.
Resolved to get a new skin, as he put it; reassured, on the other hand, as to the fate of Mrs. Kesselbach and Genevi&#232;ve, over whose peaceful existence he watched from afar; and, lastly, kept informed by Jean Doudeville, whom he had sent to Veldenz, of all the negotiations that were being pursued between the court of Berlin and the regent of Zweibrucken-Veldenz, he employed all his time in winding up the past and preparing for the future.
The thought of the different life which he wished to lead under the eyes of Mrs. Kesselbach filled him with new ambitions and unexpected sentiments, in which the image of Dolores played a part, without his being able to tell exactly how or why.
In a few weeks, he got rid of all the proofs that could have compromised him sooner or later, all the traces that could have led to his ruin.
He gave each of his old companions a sum of money sufficient to keep them from want for the rest of their lives and said good-bye to them, saying that he was going to South America.
One morning, after a night of careful thought and a deep study of the situation, he cried:
"It's done.
There's nothing to fear now.
The old Lupin is dead.
Make way for the young one."
His man brought him a telegram from Germany. It contained the news for which he had been waiting.
The Council of Regency, greatly influenced by the Court of Berlin, had referred the question to the electors; and the electors, greatly influenced by the Council of Regency, had declared their unshaken attachment to the old dynasty of the Veldenz.
Count von Waldemar was deputed, together with three delegates selected from the nobility, the army and the law, to go to Bruggen Castle, carefully to establish the identity of the Grand-duke Hermann IV.
and to make all the arrangements with His Royal Highness for his triumphal entry into the principality of his fathers, which was to take place in the course of the following month.
"This time, I've pulled it off," said Lupin to himself. "Mr. Kesselbach's great scheme is being realized. All that remains for me to do is to make Waldemar swallow Pierre Leduc; and that is child's play. The banns between Genevi&#232;ve and Pierre shall be published to-morrow.
And it shall be the grand-duke's affianced bride that will be presented to Waldemar."
Full of glee, he started in his motor for Bruggen Castle.
He sang in the car, he whistled, he chatted to his chauffeur:
"Octave, do you know whom you have the honor of driving?
The master of the world!
...
Yes, old man, that staggers you, eh?
Just so, but it's the truth.
I am the master of the world."
He rubbed his hands and went on soliloquizing:
"All the same, it was a long job. It's a year since the fight began. True, it was the most formidable fight I ever stood to win or lose... By Jupiter, what a war of giants!" And he repeated, "But this time, I've pulled it off!
The enemies are in the water.
There are no obstacles left between the goal and me.
The site is free: let us build upon it!
I have the materials at hand, I have the workmen: let us build, Lupin!
And let the palace be worthy of you!"
He stopped the car at a few hundred yards from the castle, so that his arrival might create as little fuss as possible, and said to Octave:
"Wait here for twenty minutes, until four o'clock, and then drive in.
Take my bags to the little chalet at the end of the park.
That's where I shall sleep."
At the first turn of the road, the castle appeared in sight, standing at the end of a dark avenue of lime trees.
From the distance, he saw Genevi&#232;ve passing on the terrace.
His heart was softly stirred:
"Genevi&#232;ve, Genevi&#232;ve," he said, fondly.
"Genevi&#232;ve ... the vow which I made to the dying mother is being fulfilled as well... Genevi&#232;ve a grand-duchess!
... And I, in the shade, watching over her happiness ... and pursuing the great schemes of Ars&#232;ne Lupin!"
He burst out laughing, sprang behind a cluster of trees that stood to the left of the avenue and slipped along the thick shrubberies.
In this way, he reached the castle without the possibility of his being seen from the windows of the drawing-room or the principal bedrooms.
He wanted to see Dolores before she saw him and pronounced her name several times, as he had pronounced Genevi&#232;ve's, but with an emotion that surprised himself:
"Dolores... Dolores..."
He stole along the passages and reached the dining-room.
From this room, through a glass panel, he could see half the drawing-room.
He drew nearer.
Dolores was lying on a couch; and Pierre Leduc, on his knees before her, was gazing at her with eyes of ecstasy...
Pierre Leduc loved Dolores!
Lupin felt a keen, penetrating pain in the depths of his being, as though he had been wounded in the very source of life; a pain so great that, for the first time, he had a clear perception of what Dolores had gradually, unknown to himself, become to him.
Pierre Leduc loved Dolores!
And he was looking at her as a man looks at the woman he loves.
Lupin felt a murderous instinct rise up within him, blindly and furiously. That look, that look of love cast upon Dolores, maddened him.
He received an impression of the great silence that enveloped Dolores and Pierre Leduc; and in silence, in the stillness of their attitude there was nothing living but that look of love, that dumb and sensuous hymn in which the eyes told all the passion, all the desire, all the transport, all the yearning that one being can feel for another.
And he saw Mrs. Kesselbach also.
Dolores' eyes were invisible under their lowered lids, the silky eyelids with the long black lashes.
But how she seemed to feel that look of love which sought for hers!
How she quivered under that impalpable caress!
"She loves him ... she loves him," thought Lupin, burning with jealousy.
And, when Pierre made a movement:
"Oh, the villain!
If he dares to touch her, I will kill him!"
Then, realizing the disorder of his reason and striving to combat it, he said to himself:
"What a fool I am! What, you, Lupin, letting your self go like this! ... Look here, it's only natural that she should love him...
Yes, of course, you expected her to show a certain emotion at your arrival ... a certain agitation... You silly idiot, you're only a thief, a robber ... whereas he is a prince and young..."
Pierre had not stirred further. But his lips moved and it seemed as though Dolores were waking.
Softly, slowly, she raised her lids, turned her head a little and her eyes met the young man's eyes with the look that offers itself and surrenders itself and is more intense than the most intense of kisses.
What followed came suddenly and unexpectedly, like a thunder-clap.
In three bounds, Lupin rushed into the drawing-room, sprang upon the young man, flung him to the ground and, with one hand on his rival's chest, beside himself with anger, turning to Mrs. Kesselbach, he cried:
"But don't you know?
Hasn't he told you, the cheat?
... And you love him, you love that!
Does he look like a grand-duke?
Oh, what a joke!"
He grinned and chuckled like a madman, while Dolores gazed at him in stupefaction:
"He, a grand-duke! Hermann IV., Grand-duke of Zweibrucken-Veldenz! A reigning sovereign! Elector of Treves! But it's enough to make one die of laughing! He! Why, his name is Baupré, Gérard Baupré, the lowest of ragamuffins ... a beggar, whom I picked up in the gutter! ... A grand-duke?
But it's I who made him a grand-duke!
Ha, ha, ha, what a joke! ...
If you had seen him cut his little finger ... he fainted three times ... the milksop! ...
Ah, you allow yourself to lift your eyes to ladies ... and to rebel against the master!
... Wait a bit, Grand-duke of Zweibrucken-Veldenz, I'll show you!"
He took him in his arms, like a bundle, swung him to and fro for a moment and pitched him through the open window:
"Mind the rose trees, grand-duke!
There are thorns!"
When he turned round, Dolores was close to him and looking at him with eyes which he had never seen in her before, the eyes of a woman who hates and who is incensed with rage.
Could this possibly be Dolores, the weak, ailing Dolores?
She stammered:
"What are you doing?
... How dare you?
... And he... Then it's true?
... lied to me?
..."
"Lied to you?"
cried Lupin, grasping the humiliation which she had suffered as a woman.
"Lied to you?
He, a grand-duke!
A puppet, that's all, a puppet of which I pulled the string ... an instrument which I tuned, to play upon as I chose!
Oh, the fool, the fool!"
Overcome with renewed rage, he stamped his foot and shook his fist at the open window.
And he began to walk up and down the room, flinging out phrases in which all the pent-up violence of his secret thought burst forth:
"The fool! Then he didn't see what I expected of him? He did not suspect the greatness of the part he was to play? Oh, I shall have to drive it into his noddle by force, I see! Lift up your head, you idiot!
You shall be grand-duke by the grace of Lupin!
And a reigning sovereign!
With a civil list!
And subjects to fleece!
And a palace which Charlemagne shall rebuild for you!
And a master that shall be I, Lupin!
Do you understand, you numskull?
Lift up your head, dash it!
Higher than that!
Look up at the sky, remember that a Zweibrucken was hanged for cattle-lifting before the Hohenzollerns were ever heard of.
And you are a Zweibrucken, by Jove, no less; and I am here, I, I, Lupin!
And you shall be grand-duke, I tell you!
A paste-board grand-duke?
Very well!
But a grand-duke all the same, quickened with my breath and glowing with my ardor.
A puppet?
Very well.
But a puppet that shall speak my words and make my movements and perform my wishes and realize my dreams ... yes ... my dreams."
He stood motionless, as though dazzled by the glory of his conception.
Then he went up to Dolores and, sinking his voice, with a sort of mystic exaltation, he said:
"On my left, Alsace-Lorraine... On my right, Baden, Wurtemburg, Bavaria... South Germany ... all those disconnected, discontented states, crushed under the heel of the Prussian Charlemagne, but restless and ready to throw off the yoke at any moment... Do you understand all that a man like myself can do in the midst of that, all the aspirations that he can kindle, all the hatred that he can produce, all the angry rebellion that he can inspire?"
In a still lower voice, he repeated:
"And, on my left, Alsace-Lorraine! ... Do you fully understand? ... Dreams? Not at all! It is the reality of the day after to-morrow, of to-morrow! ... Yes... I wish it... I wish it... Oh, all that I wish and all that I mean to do is unprecedented!
... Only think, at two steps from the Alsatian frontier!
In the heart of German territory!
Close to the old Rhine! ...
A little intrigue, a little genius will be enough to change the surface of the earth.
Genius I have ... and to spare... And I shall be the master!
I shall be the man who directs.
The other, the puppet can have the title and the honors... I shall have the power! ...
I shall remain in the background.
No office: I will not be a minister, nor even a chamberlain.
Nothing.
I shall be one of the servants in the palace, the gardener perhaps... Yes, the gardener... Oh, what a tremendous life!
To grow flowers and alter the map of Europe!"
She looked at him greedily, dominated, swayed by the strength of that man.
And her eyes expressed an admiration which she did not seek to conceal.
He put his hands on Dolores' shoulders and said:
"That is my dream. Great as it is, it will be surpassed by the facts: that I swear to you. The Kaiser has already seen what I am good for. One day, he will find me installed in front of him, face to face. I hold all the trumps.
Valenglay will act at my bidding... England also... The game is played and won... That is my dream... There is another one..."
He stopped suddenly.
Dolores did not take her eyes from him; and an infinite emotion changed every feature of her face.
A vast joy penetrated him as he once more felt, and clearly felt, that woman's confusion in his presence.
He no longer had the sense of being to her ... what he was, a thief, a robber; he was a man, a man who loved and whose love roused unspoken feelings in the depths of a friendly soul.
Then he said no more, but he lavished upon her, unuttered, every known word of love and admiration; and he thought of the life which he might lead somewhere, not far from Veldenz, unknown and all-powerful...
A long silence united them.
Then she rose and said, softly:
"Go away, I entreat you to go... Pierre shall marry Geneviève, I promise you that, but it is better that you should go ... that you should not be here... Go.
Pierre shall marry Geneviève."
He waited for a moment.
Perhaps he would rather have had more definite words, but he dared not ask for anything.
And he withdrew, dazed, intoxicated and happy to obey, to subject his destiny to hers!
On his way to the door, he came upon a low chair, which he had to move.
But his foot knocked against something.
He looked down.
It was a little pocket-mirror, in ebony, with a gold monogram.
Suddenly, he started and snatched up the mirror.
The monogram consisted of two letters interlaced, an "L" and an "M."
An "L" and an "M!"
"Louis de Malreich," he said to himself, with a shudder.
He turned to Dolores:
"Where does this mirror come from?
Whose is it?
It is important that I should ..."
She took it from him and looked at it:
"I don't know...
I never saw it before ... a servant, perhaps..."
"A servant, no doubt," he said, "but it is very odd ... it is one of those coincidences..."
At that moment, Geneviève entered by the other door, and without seeing Lupin, who was hidden by a screen, at once exclaimed:
"Why, there's your glass, Dolores! ... So you have found it, after making me hunt for it all this time! ... Where was it?" And the girl went away saying, "Oh, well, I'm very glad it's found! ... How upset you were! ...
I will go and tell them at once to stop looking for it..."
Lupin had not moved.
He was confused, and tried in vain to understand.
Why had Dolores not spoken the truth?
Why had she not at once said whose the mirror was?
An idea flashed across his mind; and he asked, more or less at random:
"Do you know Louis de Malreich?"
"Yes," she said, watching him, as though striving to guess the thoughts that beset him.
He rushed toward her, in a state of intense excitement:
"You know him?
Who was he?
Who is he?
Who is he?
And why did you not tell me?
Where have you known him?
Speak ... answer...
I implore you..."
"No," she said.
"But you must, you must...
Think!
Louis de Malreich!
The murderer!
The monster!
... Why did you not tell me?"
She, in turn, placed her hands on Lupin's shoulders and, in a firm voice, declared:
"Listen, you must never ask me, because I shall never tell...
It is a secret which I shall take with me to the grave... Come what may, no one will ever know, no one in the wide world, I swear it!"
He stood before her for some minutes, anxiously, with a confused brain.
He remembered Steinweg's silence and the old man's terror when Lupin asked him to reveal the terrible secret.
Dolores also knew and she also refused to speak.
He went out without a word.
The open air, the sense of space, did him good.
He passed out through the park-wall and wandered long over the country.
And he soliloquized aloud:
"What does it mean? What is happening?
For months and months, fighting hard and acting, I have been pulling the strings of all the characters that are to help me in the execution of my plans; and, during this time, I have completely forgotten to stoop over them and see what is going on in their hearts and brains.
I do not know Pierre Leduc, I do not know Geneviève, I do not know Dolores... And I have treated them as so many jumping-jacks, whereas they are live persons.
And to-day I am stumbling over obstacles."
He stamped his foot and cried:
"Over obstacles that do not exist! What do I care for the psychological state of Geneviève, of Pierre? ... I will study that later, at Veldenz, when I have secured their happiness. But Dolores ... she knew Malreich and said nothing! ... Why? What relation united them?
Was she afraid of him?
Is she afraid that he will escape from prison and come to revenge himself for an indiscretion on her part?"
At night, he went to the chalet which he had allotted to his own use at the end of the park and dined in a very bad temper, storming at Octave, who waited on him and who was always either too slow or too fast:
"I'm sick of it, leave me alone... You're doing everything wrong to-day... And this coffee...
It's not fit to drink."
He pushed back his cup half-full and, for two hours, walked about the park, sifting the same ideas over and over again.
At last, one suggestion took definite shape within his mind:
"Malreich has escaped from prison.
He is terrifying Mrs. Kesselbach.
By this time, he already knows the story of the mirror from her..."
Lupin shrugged his shoulders:
"And to-night he's coming to pull my leg, I suppose!
I'm talking nonsense.
The best thing I can do is to go to bed."
He went to his room, undressed and got into bed.
He fell asleep at once, with a heavy sleep disturbed by nightmares.
Twice he woke and tried to light his candle and twice fell back, as though stunned by a blow.
Nevertheless, he heard the hours strike on the village clock, or rather he thought that he heard them strike, for he was plunged in a sort of torpor in which he seemed to retain all his wits.
And he was haunted by dreams, dreams of anguish and terror.
He plainly heard the sound of his window opening.
He plainly, through his closed eyelids, through the thick darkness, saw a form come toward the bed.
And the form bent over him.
He made the incredible effort needed to raise his eyelids and look ... or, at least, he imagined that he did.
Was he dreaming?
Was he awake?
He asked himself the question in despair.
A further sound...
He took up the box of matches by his bedside:
"Let's have a light on it," he said, with a great sense of elation.
He struck a match and lit the candle.
Lupin felt the perspiration stream over his skin, from head to foot, while his heart ceased beating, stopped with terror.
The man was there.
Was it possible?
No, no ... and yet he saw... Oh, the fearsome sight!
...
The man, the monster, was there...
"He shall not ... he shall not," stammered Lupin madly.
The man, the monster was there, dressed in black, with a mask on his face and with his felt hat pulled down over his fair hair.
"Oh, I am dreaming...
I am dreaming!"
said Lupin, laughing.
"It's a nightmare!
..."
Exerting all his strength and all his will-power, he tried to make a movement, one movement, to drive away the vision.
He could not.
And, suddenly, he remembered: the coffee!
The taste of it ... similar to the taste of the coffee which he had drunk at Veldenz!
He gave a cry, made a last effort and fell back exhausted.
But, in his delirium, he felt that the man was unfastening the top button of his pajama-jacket and baring his neck, felt that the man was raising his arm, saw that the hand was clutching the handle of a dagger, a little steel dagger similar to that which had struck Kesselbach, Chapman, Altenheim and so many others...
A few hours later, Lupin woke up, shattered with fatigue, with a scorched palate.
He lay for several minutes collecting his thoughts and, suddenly, remembering, made an instinctive defensive movement, as though he were being attacked:
"Fool that I am!" he cried, jumping out of bed. "It was a nightmare, an hallucination. It only needs a little reflection.
Had it been 'he,' had it really been a man, in flesh and blood, who lifted his hand against me last night, he would have cut my throat like a rabbit's. '
He' doesn't hesitate.
Let's be logical.
Why should he spare me?
For the sake of my good looks?
No, I have been dreaming, that's all..."
He began to whistle and dressed himself, assuming the greatest calmness, but his brain never ceased working and his eyes sought about...
On the floor, on the window-ledge, not a trace.
As his room was on the ground-floor and as he slept with his window open, it was evident that his assailant would have entered that way.
Well, he discovered nothing; and nothing either at the foot of the wall outside, or on the gravel of the path that ran round the chalet.
"Still ... still ..." he repeated, between his teeth...
He called Octave:
"Where did you make the coffee which you gave me last night?"
"At the castle, governor, like the rest of the things.
There is no range here."
"Did you drink any of it?"
"No."
"Did you throw away what was left in the coffee-pot?"
"Why, yes, governor.
You said it was so bad.
You only took a few mouthfuls."
"Very well.
Get the motor ready.
We're leaving."
Lupin was not the man to remain in doubt.
He wanted to have a decisive explanation with Dolores.
But, for this, he must first clear up certain points that seemed to him obscure and see Jean Doudeville who had sent him some rather curious information from Veldenz.
He drove, without stopping, to the grand-duchy, which he reached at two o'clock. He had an interview with Count de Waldemar, whom he asked, upon some pretext, to delay the journey of the delegates of the Regency to Bruggen.
Then he went in search of Doudeville, in a tavern at Veldenz.
Doudeville took him to another tavern, where he introduced him to a shabbily-dressed little gentleman, Herr Stockli, a clerk in the department of births, deaths and marriages. They had a long conversation. They went out together and all three passed stealthily through the offices of the town-hall.
At seven o'clock, Lupin dined and set out again.
At ten o'clock he arrived at Bruggen Castle and asked for Geneviève, so that she might take him to Mrs. Kesselbach's room.
He was told that Mlle.
Ernemont had been summoned back to Paris by a telegram from her grandmother.
"Ah!"
he said.
"Could I see Mrs.
Kesselbach?"
"Mrs. Kesselbach went straight to bed after dinner.
She is sure to be asleep."
"No, I saw a light in her boudoir.
She will see me."
He did not even wait for Mrs. Kesselbach to send out an answer.
He walked into the boudoir almost upon the maid's heels, dismissed her and said to Dolores:
"I have to speak to you, madame, on an urgent matter... Forgive me ...
I confess that my behavior must seem importunate...
But you will understand, I am sure..."
He was greatly excited and did not seem much disposed to put off the explanation, especially as, before entering the room, he thought he heard a sound.
Yet Dolores was alone and lying down.
And she said, in her tired voice:
"Perhaps we might ... to-morrow..."
He did not answer, suddenly struck by a smell that surprised him in that boudoir, a smell of tobacco.
And, at once, he had the intuition, the certainty, that there was a man there, at the moment when he himself arrived, and that perhaps the man was there still, hidden somewhere...
Pierre Leduc?
No, Pierre Leduc did not smoke.
Then who?
Dolores murmured:
"Be quick, please."
"Yes, yes, but first ... would it be possible for you to tell me ...
?"
He interrupted himself.
What was the use of asking her?
If there were really a man in hiding, would she be likely to tell?
Then he made up his mind and, trying to overcome the sort of timid constraint that oppressed him at the sense of a strange presence, he said, in a very low voice, so that Dolores alone should hear:
"Listen, I have learnt something ... which I do not understand ... and which perplexes me greatly.
You will answer me, will you not, Dolores?"
He spoke her name with great gentleness and as though he were trying to master her by the note of love and affection in his voice.
"What have you learnt?"
she asked.
"The register of births at Veldenz contains three names which are those of the last descendants of the family of Malreich, which settled in Germany..."
"Yes, you have told me all that..."
"You remember, the first name is Raoul de Malreich, better known under his alias of Altenheim, the scoundrel, the swell hooligan, now dead ...
murdered."
"Yes."
"Next comes Louis de Malreich, the monster, this one, the terrible murderer who will be beheaded in a few days from now."
"Yes."
"Then, lastly, Isilda, the mad daughter..."
"Yes."
"So all that is quite positive, is it not?"
"Yes."
"Well," said Lupin, leaning over her more closely than before, "I have just made an investigation which showed to me that the second of the three Christian names, or rather a part of the line on which it is written, has at some time or other, been subjected to erasure.
The line is written over, in a new hand, with much fresher ink; but the writing below is not quite effaced, so that..."
"So that ...
?"
asked Mrs. Kesselbach, in a low voice.
"So that, with a good lens and particularly with the special methods which I have at my disposal, I was able to revive some of the obliterated syllables and, without any possibility of a mistake, in all certainty, to reconstruct the old writing.
I then found not Louis de Malreich, but ..."
"Oh, don't, don't!
..."
Suddenly shattered by the strain of her prolonged effort of resistance, she lay bent in two and, with her head in her hands, her shoulders shaken with convulsive sobs, she wept.
Lupin looked for long seconds at this weak and listless creature, so pitifully helpless. And he would have liked to stop, to cease the torturing questions which he was inflicting upon her. But was it not to save her that he was acting as he did?
And, to save her, was it not necessary that he should know the truth, however painful?
He resumed:
"Why that forgery?"
"It was my husband," she stammered, "it was my husband who did it.
With his fortune, he could do everything; and he bribed a junior clerk to have the Christian name of the second child altered for him on the register."
"The Christian name and the sex," said Lupin.
"Yes," she said.
"Then," he continued, "I am not mistaken: the original Christian name, the real one, was Dolores?"
"Yes."
"But why did your husband ...
?"
She whispered in a shame-faced manner, while the tears streamed down her cheeks.
"Don't you understand?"
"No."
"But think," she said, shuddering, "I was the sister of Isilda, the mad woman, the sister of Altenheim, the ruffian. My husband - or rather my affianced husband - would not have me remain that. He loved me. I loved him too, and I consented.
He suppressed Dolores de Malreich on the register, he bought me other papers, another personality, another birth-certificate; and I was married in Holland under another maiden name, as Dolores Amonti."
Lupin reflected for a moment and said, thoughtfully:
"Yes ... yes ...
I understand...
But then Louis de Malreich does not exist; and the murderer of your husband, the murderer of your brother and sister, does not bear that name... His name..."
She sprang to a sitting posture and, eagerly:
"His name! Yes, that is his name ... yes, it is his name nevertheless... Louis de Malreich... L. M... Remember... Oh, do not try to find out ... it is the terrible secret... Besides, what does it matter? ... They have the criminal... He is the criminal...
I tell you he is.
Did he defend himself when I accused him, face to face?
Could he defend himself, under that name or any other?
It is he ... it is he ... He committed the murders... He struck the blows... The dagger...
The steel dagger... Oh, if I could only tell all I know! ...
Louis de Malreich... If I could only ..."
She fell back on the sofa in a fit of hysterical sobbing; and her hand clutched Lupin's and he heard her stammering, amid inarticulate words:
"Protect me ... protect me... You alone, perhaps... Oh, do not forsake me...
I am so unhappy!
... Oh, what torture ... what torture!
...
It is hell!
..."
With his free hand, he stroked her hair and forehead with infinite gentleness; and, under his caress, she gradually relaxed her tense nerves and became calmer and quieter.
Then he looked at her again and long, long asked himself what there could be behind that fair, white brow, what secret was ravaging that mysterious soul.
She also was afraid.
But of whom?
Against whom was she imploring him to protect her?
Once again, he was obsessed by the image of the man in black, by that Louis de Malreich, the sinister and incomprehensible enemy, whose attacks he had to ward off without knowing whence they came or even if they were taking place.
He was in prison, watched day and night.
Tush!
Did Lupin not know by his own experience that there are beings for whom prison does not exist and who throw off their chains at the given moment?
And Louis de Malreich was one of those.
Yes, there was some one in the Santé prison, in the condemned man's cell.
But it might be an accomplice or some victim of Malreich ... while Malreich himself prowled around Bruggen Castle, slipped in under cover of the darkness, like an invisible spectre, made his way into the chalet in the park and, at night, raised his dagger against Lupin asleep and helpless.
And it was Louis de Malreich who terrorized Dolores, who drove her mad with his threats, who held her by some dreadful secret and forced her into silence and submission.
And Lupin imagined the enemy's plan: to throw Dolores, scared and trembling, into Pierre Leduc's arms, to make away with him, Lupin, and to reign in his place, over there, with the grand-duke's power and Dolores's millions.
It was a likely supposition, a certain supposition, which fitted in with the facts and provided a solution of all the problems.
"Of all?"
thought Lupin.
"Yes...
But then, why did he not kill me, last night, in the chalet?
He had but to wish ... and he did not wish.
One movement and I was dead.
He did not make that movement.
Why?"
Dolores opened her eyes, saw him and smiled, with a pale smile:
"Leave me," she said:
He rose, with some hesitation.
Should he go and see if the enemy was behind the curtain or hidden behind the dresses in a cupboard?
She repeated, gently:
"Go ...
I am so sleepy..."
He went away.
But, outside, he stopped behind some trees that formed a dark cluster in front of the castle.
He saw a light in Dolores' boudoir.
Then the light passed into the bedroom.
In a few minutes, all was darkness.
He waited.
If the enemy was there, perhaps he would come out of the castle...
An hour elapsed... Two hours... Not a sound...
"There's nothing to be done," thought Lupin.
"Either he is burrowing in some corner of the castle ... or else he has gone out by a door which I cannot see from here.
Unless the whole thing is the most ridiculous supposition on my part..."
He lit a cigarette and walked back to the chalet.
As he approached it, he saw, at some distance from him, a shadow that appeared to be moving away.
He did not stir, for fear of giving the alarm.
The shadow crossed a path.
By the light of the moon, he seemed to recognize the black figure of Malreich.
He rushed forward.
The shadow fled and vanished from sight.
"Come," he said, "it shall be for to-morrow.
And, this time..."
Lupin went to Octave's, his chauffeur's, room, woke him and said:
"Take the motor and go to Paris. You will be there by six o'clock in the morning.
See Jacques Doudeville and tell him two things: first, to give me news of the man under sentence of death; and secondly, as soon as the post-offices open, to send me a telegram which I will write down for you now..."
He worded the telegram on a scrap of paper and added:
"The moment you have done that, come back, but this way, along the wall of the park.
Go now.
No one must suspect your absence."
Lupin went to his own room, pressed the spring of his lantern and began to make a minute inspection. "It's as I thought," he said presently. "Some one came here to-night, while I was watching beneath the window. And, if he came, I know what he came for...
I was certainly right: things are getting warm... The first time, I was spared.
This time, I may be sure of my little stab."
For prudence's sake, he took a blanket, chose a lonely spot in the park and spent the night under the stars.
Octave was back by ten o'clock in the morning:
"It's all right, governor.
The telegram has been sent."
"Good.
And is Louis de Malreich still in prison?"
"Yes.
Doudeville passed his cell at the Santé last night as the warder was coming out.
They talked together.
Malreich is just the same, it appears: silent as the grave.
He is waiting."
"Waiting for what?"
"The fatal hour of course.
They are saying, at headquarters, that the execution will take place on the day after to-morrow."
"That's all right, that's all right," said Lupin.
"And one thing is quite plain: he has not escaped."
He ceased to understand or even to look for the explanation of the riddle, so clearly did he feel that the whole truth would soon be revealed to him.
He had only to prepare his plan, for the enemy to fall into the trap.
"Or for me to fall into it myself," he thought, laughing.
He felt very gay, very free from care; and no fight had ever looked more promising to him.
A footman came from the castle with the telegram which he had told Doudeville to send him and which the postman had just brought.
He opened it and put it in his pocket.
A little before twelve o'clock, he met Pierre Leduc in one of the avenues and said, off-hand:
"I am looking for you ... things are serious... You must answer me frankly.
Since you have been at the castle, have you ever seen a man there, besides the two German servants whom I sent in?"
"No."
"Think carefully.
I'm not referring to a casual visitor.
I mean a man who hides himself, a man whose presence you might have discovered or, less than that, whose presence you might have suspected from some clue or even by some intuition?"
"No... Have you ...
?"
"Yes. Some one is hiding here ... some one is prowling about... Where? And who is it? And what is his object? I don't know ... but I shall know. I already have a suspicion. Do you, on your side, keep your eyes open and watch.
And, above all, not a word to Mrs. Kesselbach... It is no use alarming her..."
He went away.
Pierre Leduc, taken aback and upset, went back to the castle. On his way, he saw a piece of blue paper on the edge of the lawn. He picked it up.
It was a telegram, not crumpled, like a piece of paper that had been thrown away, but carefully folded: obviously lost.
It was addressed to "Beauny," the name by which Lupin was known at Bruggen.
And it contained these words:
"We know the whole truth.
Revelations impossible by letter.
Will take train to-night.
Meet me eight o'clock to-morrow morning Bruggen station."
"Excellent!" said Lupin, who was watching Pierre Leduc's movements from a neighboring coppice. "Excellent! In two minutes from now, the young idiot will have shown Dolores the telegram and told her all my fears. They will talk about it all day.
And 'the other one' will hear, 'the other one' will know, because he knows everything, because he lives in Dolores' own shadow and because Dolores is like a fascinated prey in his hands... And, to-night..."
He walked away humming to himself:
"To-night ... to-night ... we shall dance...
Such a waltz, my boys!
The waltz of blood, to the tune of the little nickel-plated dagger!
... We shall have some fun, at last!
..."
He reached the chalet, called to Octave, went to his room, flung himself on his bed, and said to the chauffeur:
"Sit down in that chair, Octave, and keep awake.
Your master is going to take forty winks.
Watch over him, you faithful servant."
He had a good sleep.
"Like Napoleon on the morning of Austerlitz," he said, when he woke up.
It was dinner-time.
He made a hearty meal and then, while he smoked a cigarette, inspected his weapons and renewed the charges of his two revolvers:
"Keep your powder dry and your sword sharpened, as my chum the Kaiser says.
Octave!"
Octave appeared.
"Go and have your dinner at the castle, with the servants.
Tell them you are going to Paris to-night, in the motor."
"With you, governor?"
"No, alone.
And, as soon as dinner is over, make a start, ostensibly."
"But I am not to go to Paris..."
"No, remain outside the park, half a mile down the road, until I come.
You will have a long wait."
He smoked another cigarette, went for a stroll, passed in front of the castle, saw a light in Dolores' rooms and then returned to the chalet.
There he took up a book.
It was The Lives of Illustrious Men.
"There is one missing: the most illustrious of all.
But the future will put that right; and I shall have my Plutarch some day or other."
He read the life of Caesar and jotted down a few reflections in the margin.
At half-past eleven, he went to his bedroom.
Through the open window, he gazed into the immense, cool night, all astir with indistinct sounds.
Memories rose to his lips, memories of fond phrases which he had read or uttered; and he repeatedly whispered Dolores's name, with the fervor of a stripling who hardly dares confide to the silence the name of his beloved.
He left the window half open, pushed aside a table that blocked the way, and put his revolvers under his pillow.
Then, peacefully, without evincing the least excitement, he got into bed, fully dressed as he was, and blew out the candle.
And his fear began.
It was immediate.
No sooner did he feel the darkness around him than his fear began!
"Damn it all!"
he cried.
He jumped out of bed, took his weapons and threw them into the passage:
"My hands, my hands alone!
Nothing comes up to the grip of my hands!"
He went to bed again.
Darkness and silence, once more.
And, once more, his fear...
The village clock struck twelve...
Lupin thought of the foul monster who, outside, at a hundred yards, at fifty yards from where he lay, was trying the sharp point of his dagger:
"Let him come, let him come?"
whispered Lupin, shuddering.
"Then the ghosts will vanish..."
One o'clock, in the village...
And minutes passed, endless minutes, minutes of fever and anguish... Beads of perspiration stood at the roots of his hair and trickled down his forehead; and he felt as though his whole frame were bathed in a sweat of blood...
Two o'clock...
And now, somewhere, quite close, a hardly perceptible sound stirred, a sound of leaves moving ... but different from the sound of leaves moving in the night breeze...
As Lupin had foreseen, he was at once pervaded by an immense calm.
All his adventurous being quivered with delight.
The struggle was at hand, at last!
Another sound grated under the window, more plainly this time, but still so faint that it needed Lupin's trained ear to distinguish it.
Minutes, terrifying minutes...
The darkness was impenetrable.
No light of star or moon relieved it.
And, suddenly, without hearing anything, he knew that the man was in the room.
And the man walked toward the bed.
He walked as a ghost walks, without displacing the air of the room, without shaking the objects which he touched.
But, with all his instinct, with all his nervous force, Lupin saw the movements of the enemy and guessed the very sequence of his ideas.
He himself did not budge, but remained propped against the wall, almost on his knees, ready to spring.
He felt that the figure was touching, feeling the bed-clothes, to find the spot at which it must strike. Lupin heard its breath. He even thought that he heard the beating of its heart.
And he noticed with pride that his own heart beat no louder than before ... whereas the heart of the other ... oh, yes, he could hear it now, that disordered, mad heart, knocking, like a clapper of a bell, against the cavity of the chest!
The hand of the other rose...
A second, two seconds...
Was he hesitating?
Was he once more going to spare his adversary?
And Lupin, in the great silence, said:
"But strike!
Why don't you strike?"
A yell of rage...
The arm fell as though moved by a spring.
Then came a moan.
Lupin had caught the arm in mid-air at the level of the wrist... And, leaping out of bed, tremendous, irresistible, he clutched the man by the throat and threw him.
That was all.
There was no struggle.
There was no possibility even of a struggle.
The man lay on the floor, nailed, pinned by two steel rivets, which were Lupin's hands.
And there was not a man in the world strong enough to release himself from that grip.
And not a word.
Lupin uttered none of those phrases in which his mocking humor usually delighted.
He had no inclination to speak.
The moment was too solemn.
He felt no vain glee, no victorious exaltation.
In reality, he had but one longing, to know who was there: Louis de Malreich, the man sentenced to death, or another?
Which was it?
At the risk of strangling the man, he squeezed the throat a little more ... and a little more ... and a little more still...
And he felt that all the enemy's strength, all the strength that remained to him, was leaving him.
The muscles of the arm relaxed and became lifeless.
The hand opened and dropped the dagger.
Then, free to move as he pleased, with his adversary's life hanging in the terrible clutch of his fingers, he took his pocket-lantern with one hand, laid his finger on the spring, without pressing, and brought it close to the man's face.
He had only to press the spring to wish to know and he would know.
For a second, he enjoyed his power.
A flood of emotion upheaved him.
The vision, of his triumph dazzled him.
Once again, superbly, heroically, he was the master.
He switched on the light.
The face of the monster came into view.
Lupin gave a shriek of terror.
Dolores Kesselbach!
A cyclone passed through Lupin's brain, a hurricane in which roars of thunder, gusts of wind, squalls of all the distraught elements were tumultuously unchained in the chaotic night.
And great flashes of lightning shot through the darkness.
And, by the dazzling gleam of those lightning-flashes, Lupin, scared, shaken with thrills, convulsed with horror, saw and tried to understand.
He did not move, clinging to the enemy's throat, as if his stiffened fingers were no longer able to release their grip. Besides, although he now knew, he had not, so to speak, the exact feeling that it was Dolores.
It was still the man in black, Louis de Malreich, the foul brute of the darkness; and that brute he held and did not mean to let go.
But the truth rushed upon the attack of his mind and of his consciousness; and, conquered, tortured with anguish, he muttered:
"Oh, Dolores!
... Dolores!
..."
He at once saw the excuse: it was madness. She was mad. The sister of Altenheim and Isilda, the daughter of the last of the Malreichs, of the demented mother, of the drunken father, was herself mad.
A strange madwoman, mad with every appearance of sanity, but mad nevertheless, unbalanced, brain-sick, unnatural, truly monstrous.
That he most certainly understood!
It was homicidal madness.
Under the obsession of an object toward which she was drawn automatically, she killed, thirsting for blood, unconsciously, infernally.
She killed because she wanted something, she killed in self-defence, she killed because she had killed before. But she killed also and especially for the sake of killing. Murder satisfied sudden and irresistible appetites that arose in her.
At certain seconds in her life, in certain circumstances, face to face with this or that being who had suddenly become the foe, her arm had to strike.
And she struck, drunk with rage, ferociously, frenziedly.
A strange madwoman, not answerable for her murders, and yet so lucid in her blindness, so logical in her mental derangement, so intelligent in her absurdity!
What skill, what perseverance, what cunning contrivances, at once abominable and admirable!
And Lupin, in a rapid view, with prodigious keenness of outlook, saw the long array of bloodthirsty adventures and guessed the mysterious paths which Dolores had pursued.
He saw her obsessed and possessed by her husband's scheme, a scheme which she evidently understood only in part.
He saw her, on her side, looking for that same Pierre Leduc whom her husband was seeking, looking for him in order to marry him and to return, as queen, to that little realm of Veldenz from which her parents had been ignominiously driven.
And he saw her at the Palace Hotel, in the room of her brother, Altenheim, at the time when she was supposed to be at Monte Carlo.
He saw her, for days together, spying upon her husband, creeping along the walls, one with the darkness, undistinguishable and unseen in her shadowy disguise.
And, one night, she found Mr. Kesselbach fastened up ... and she stabbed him.
And, in the morning, when on the point of being denounced by the floor-waiter ... she stabbed him.
And, an hour later, when on the point of being denounced by Chapman, she dragged him to her brother's room ... and stabbed him.
All this pitilessly, savagely, with diabolical skill.
And, with the same skill, she communicated by telephone with her two maids, Gertrude and Suzanne, both of whom had arrived from Monte Carlo, where one of them had enacted the part of her mistress.
And Dolores, resuming her feminine attire, discarding the fair wig that altered her appearance beyond recognition, went down to the ground-floor, joined Gertrude at the moment when the maid entered the hotel and pretended herself to have just arrived, all ignorant of the tragedy that awaited her.
An incomparable actress, she played the part of the wife whose life is shattered.
Every one pitied her.
Every one wept for her.
Who could have suspected her?
And then came the war with him, Lupin, that barbarous contest, that unparalleled contest which she waged, by turns, against M. Lenormand and Prince Sernine, spending her days stretched on her sofa, ill and fainting, but her nights on foot, scouring the roads indefatigable and terrible.
And the diabolical contrivances: Gertrude and Suzanne, frightened and subdued accomplices, both of them serving her as emissaries, disguising themselves to represent her, perhaps, as on the day when old Steinweg was carried off by Baron Altenheim, in the middle of the Palais de Justice.
And the series of murders: Gourel drowned; Altenheim, her brother, stabbed.
Oh, the implacable struggle in the underground passages of the Villa des Glycines, the invisible work performed by the monster in the dark: how clear it all appeared to-day!
And it was she who tore off his mask as Prince Sernine, she who betrayed him to the police, she who sent him to prison, she who thwarted all his plans, spending her millions to win the battle.
And then events followed faster: Suzanne and Gertrude disappeared, dead, no doubt!
Steinweg, assassinated!
Isilda, the sister, assassinated!
"Oh, the ignominy, the horror of it!"
stammered Lupin, with a start of revulsion and hatred.
He execrated her, the abominable creature.
He would have liked to crush her, to destroy her.
And it was a stupefying sight, those two beings, clinging to each other, lying motionless in the pale dawn that began to mingle with the shades of the night.
"Dolores... Dolores..." he muttered, in despair.
He leapt back, terror-stricken, wild-eyed.
What was it?
What was that?
What was that hideous feeling of cold which froze his hands?
"Octave!
Octave?"
he shouted, forgetting that the chauffeur was not there.
Help, he needed help, some one to reassure him and assist him.
He shivered with fright.
Oh, that coldness, that coldness of death which he had felt!
Was it possible?
... Then, during those few tragic minutes, with his clenched fingers, he had...
Violently, he forced himself to look.
Dolores did not stir.
He flung himself on his knees and drew her to him.
She was dead.
He remained for some seconds a prey to a sort of numbness in which his grief seemed to be swallowed up. He no longer suffered.
He no longer felt rage nor hatred nor emotion of any kind ... nothing but a stupid prostration, the sensation of a man who has received a blow with a club and who does not know if he is still alive, if he is thinking, or if he is the sport of a nightmare.
Nevertheless, it seemed to him that an act of justice had taken place, and it did not for a second occur to him that it was he who had taken life. No, it was not he. It was outside him and his will.
It was destiny, inexorable destiny that had accomplished the work of equity by slaying the noxious beast.
Outside, the birds were singing. Life was recommencing under the old trees, which the spring was preparing to bring into bud.
And Lupin, waking from his torpor, felt gradually welling up within him an indefinable and ridiculous compassion for the wretched woman, odious, certainly, abject and twenty times criminal, but so young still and now ... dead.
And he thought of the tortures which she must have undergone in her lucid moments, when reason returned to the unspeakable madwoman and brought the sinister vision of her deeds.
"Protect me...
I am so unhappy!"
she used to beg.
It was against herself that she asked to be protected, against her wild-beast instincts, against the monster that dwelt within her and forced her to kill, always to kill.
"Always?"
Lupin asked himself.
And he remembered the night, two days since, when, standing over him, with her dagger raised against the enemy who had been harassing her for months, against the indefatigable enemy who had run her to earth after each of her crimes, he remembered that, on that night, she had not killed.
And yet it would have been easy: the enemy lay lifeless and powerless.
One blow and the implacable struggle was over.
No, she had not killed, she too had given way to feelings stronger than her own cruelty, to mysterious feelings of pity, of sympathy, of admiration for the man who had so often mastered her.
No, she had not killed, that time.
And now, by a really terrifying vicissitude of fate, it was he who had killed her.
"I have taken life!"
he thought, shuddering from head to foot.
"These hands have killed a living being; and that creature is Dolores!
... Dolores!
... Dolores!
..."
He never ceased repeating her name, her name of sorrow, and he never ceased staring at her, a sad, lifeless thing, harmless now, a poor hunk of flesh, with no more consciousness than a little heap of withered leaves or a little dead bird by the roadside.
Oh!
how could he do other than quiver with compassion, seeing that of those two, face to face, he was the murderer, and she, who was no more, the victim?
"Dolores!
... Dolores!
... Dolores!
..."
The daylight found Lupin seated beside the dead woman, remembering and thinking, while his lips, from time to time, uttered the disconsolate syllables:
"Dolores!
... Dolores!
..."
He had to act, however, and, in the disorder of his ideas, he did not know how to act nor with what act to begin:
"I must close her eyes first," he said.
The eyes, all empty, filled only with death, those beautiful gold-spangled eyes, had still the melancholy softness that gave them their charm. Was it possible that those eyes were the eyes of a monster?
In spite of himself and in the face of the implacable reality, Lupin was not yet able to blend into one single being those two creatures whose images remained so distinct at the back of his brain.
He stooped swiftly, lowered the long, silky eyelids, and covered the poor distorted face with a veil.
Then it seemed to him that Dolores was farther away and that the man in black was really there, this time, in his dark clothes, in his murderer's disguise.
He now ventured to touch her, to feel in her clothes.
In an inside pocket were two pocket-books.
He took one of them and opened it.
He found first a letter signed by Steinweg, the old German.
It contained the following lines:
"Should I die before being able to reveal the terrible secret, let it be known that the murderer of my friend Kesselbach is his wife, whose real name is Dolores de Malreich, sister to Altenheim and sister to Isilda.
"The initials L. and M. relate to her. Kesselbach never, in their private life, called his wife Dolores, which is the name of sorrow, but Letitia, which denotes joy.
L. M. &#8212; Letitia de Malreich &#8212; were the initials inscribed on all the presents which he used to give her, for instance, on the cigarette-case which was found at the Palace Hotel and which belonged to Mrs. Kesselbach.
She had contracted the smoking-habit on her travels.
"Letitia!
She was indeed the joy of his life for four years, four years of lies and hypocrisy, in which she prepared the death of the man who loved her so well and who trusted her so whole-heartedly.
"Perhaps I ought to have spoken at once.
I had not the courage, in memory of my old friend Kesselbach, whose name she bore.
"And then I was afraid... On the day when I unmasked her, at the Palais de Justice, I read my doom in her eyes.
"Will my weakness save me?"
"Him also," thought Lupin, "him also she killed!
... Why, of course, he knew too much!
...
The initials ... that name, Letitia ... the secret habit of smoking!"
And he remembered the previous night, that smell of tobacco in her room.
He continued his inspection of the first pocket-book. There were scraps of letters, in cipher, no doubt handed to Dolores by her accomplices, in the course of their nocturnal meetings.
There were also addresses on bits of paper, addresses of milliners and dressmakers, but addresses also of low haunts, of common hotels... And names ... twenty, thirty names ... queer names: Hector the Butcher, Armand of Grenelle, the Sick Man ...
But a photograph caught Lupin's eye.
He looked at it.
And, at once, as though shot from a spring, dropping the pocket-book, he bolted out of the room, out of the chalet and rushed into the park.
He had recognized the portrait of Louis de Malreich, the prisoner at the Sant&#233;!
Not till then, not till that exact moment did he remember: the execution was to take place next day.
And, as the man in black, as the murderer was none other than Dolores Kesselbach, Louis de Malreich's name was really and truly Leon Massier and he was innocent!
Innocent?
But the evidence found in his house, the Emperor's letters, all, all the things that accused him beyond hope of denial, all those incontrovertible proofs?
Lupin stopped for a second, with his brain on fire:
"Oh," he cried, "I shall go mad, I, too!
Come, though, I must act ... the sentence is to be executed ... to-morrow ... to-morrow at break of day."
He looked at his watch:
"Ten o'clock... How long will it take me to reach Paris? Well ... I shall be there presently ... yes, presently, I must... And this very evening I shall take measures to prevent... But what measures? How can I prove his innocence? ... How prevent the execution? Oh, never mind!
Once I am there, I shall find a way.
My name is not Lupin for nothing! ...
Come on! ..."
He set off again at a run, entered the castle and called out:
"Pierre!
Pierre!
... Has any one seen M. Pierre Leduc?
... Oh, there you are!
...
Listen..."
He took him on one side and jerked out, in imperious tones:
"Listen, Dolores is not here... Yes, she was called away on urgent business ... she left last night in my motor... I am going too... Don't interrupt, not a word! ... A second lost means irreparable harm... You, send away all the servants, without any explanation. Here is money.
In half an hour from now, the castle must be empty.
And let no one enter it until I return... Not you either, do you understand? ...
I forbid you to enter the castle... I'll explain later ... serious reasons.
Here, take the key with you...
Wait for me in the village..."
And once more, he darted away.
Five minutes later, he was with Octave.
He jumped into the car:
"Paris!"
The journey was a real race for life or death. Lupin, thinking that Octave was not driving fast enough, took the steering-wheel himself and drove at a furious, break-neck speed. On the road, through the villages, along the crowded streets of the towns they rushed at sixty miles an hour.
People whom they nearly upset roared and yelled with rage: the meteor was far away, was out of sight.
"G &#8212; governor," stammered Octave, livid with dismay, "we shall be stuck!"
"You, perhaps, the motor, perhaps; but I shall arrive!"
said Lupin.
He had a feeling as though it were not the car that was carrying him, but he carrying the car and as though he were cleaving space by dint of his own strength, his own will-power.
Then what miracle could prevent his arriving, seeing that his strength was inexhaustible, his will-power unbounded?
"I shall arrive because I have got to arrive," he repeated.
And he thought of the man who would die, if he did not arrive in time to save him, of the mysterious Louis de Malreich, so disconcerting with his stubborn silence and his expressionless face.
And amid the roar of the road, under the trees whose branches made a noise as of furious waves, amid the buzzing of his thoughts, Lupin, all the same, strove to set up an hypothesis.
And this hypothesis became gradually more defined, logical, probable, certain, he said to himself, now that he knew the hideous truth about Dolores and saw all the resources and all the odious designs of that crazy mind:
"Yes, it was she who contrived that most terrible plot against Malreich. What was it she wanted? To marry Pierre Leduc, whom she had bewitched, and to become the sovereign of the little principality from which she had been banished. The object was attainable, within reach of her hand.
There was one sole obstacle...
I, Lupin, who, for weeks and weeks, persistently barred her road; I, whom she encountered after every murder; I, whose perspicacity she dreaded; I, who would never lay down my arms before I had discovered the culprit and found the letters stolen from the Emperor... Well, the culprit should be Louis de Malreich, or rather, Leon Massier.
Who was this Leon Massier?
Did she know him before her marriage?
Had she been in love with him?
It is probable; but this, no doubt, we shall never know.
One thing is certain, that she was struck by the resemblance to Leon Massier in figure and stature which she might attain by dressing up like him, in black clothes, and putting on a fair wig.
She must have noticed the eccentric life led by that lonely man, his nocturnal expeditions, his manner of walking in the streets and of throwing any who might follow him off the scent.
And it was in consequence of these observations and in anticipation of possible eventualities that she advised Mr. Kesselbach to erase the name of Dolores from the register of births and to replace it by the name of Louis, so that the initials might correspond with those of Leon Massier...
The moment arrived at which she must act; and thereupon she concocted her plot and proceeded to put it into execution.
Leon lived in the Rue Delaizement.
She ordered her accomplices to take up their quarters in the street that backed on to it.
And she herself told me the address of Dominique the head-waiter, and put me on the track of the seven scoundrels, knowing perfectly well that, once on the track, I was bound to follow it to the end, that is to say, beyond the seven scoundrels, till I came up with their leader, the man who watched them and who commanded them, the man in black, Leon Massier, Louis de Malreich... As a matter of fact, I came up with the seven scoundrels first.
Then what would happen?
Either I should be beaten or we should all destroy one another, as she must have hoped, that night in the Rue des Vignes.
In either case Dolores would have been rid of me.
But what really happened was this: I captured the seven scoundrels.
Dolores fled from the Rue des Vignes.
I found her in the Broker's shed.
She sent me after Leon Massier, that is to say, Louis de Malreich.
I found in his house the Emperor's letters, which she herself had placed there, and I delivered him to justice and I revealed the secret communication, which she herself had caused to be made, between the two coach-houses, and I produced all the evidence which she herself had prepared, and I proved, by means of documents which she herself had forged, that Leon Massier had stolen the social status of Leon Massier and that his real name was Louis de Malreich... And Louis de Malreich was sentenced to death... And Dolores de Malreich, victorious at last, safe from all suspicion once the culprit was discovered, released from her infamous and criminal past, her husband dead, her brother dead, her sister dead, her two maids dead, Steinweg dead, delivered by me from her accomplices, whom I handed over to Weber all packed up, delivered, lastly, from herself by me, who was sending the innocent man whom she had substituted for herself to the scaffold, Dolores de Malreich, triumphant, rich with the wealth of her millions and loved by Pierre Leduc, Dolores de Malreich would sit upon the throne of her native grand-duchy... Ah," cried Lupin, beside himself with excitement, "that man shall not die!
I swear it as I live: he shall not die!"
"Look out, governor," said Octave, scared, "we are near the town now... the outskirts ... the suburbs..."
"What shall I care?"
"But we shall topple over... And the pavement is greasy ... we are skidding..."
"Never mind."
"Take care... Look ahead..."
"What?"
"A tram-car, at the turn..."
"Let it stop!"
"Do slow down, governor!"
"Never!"
"But we have no room to pass!"
"We shall get through."
"We can't get through."
"Yes, we can."
"Oh, Lord!"
A crash ... outcries...
The motor had run into the tram-car, cannoned against a fence, torn down ten yards of planking and, lastly, smashed itself against the corner of a slope.
"Driver, are you disengaged?"
Lupin, lying flat on the grass of the slope, had hailed a taxi-cab.
He scrambled to his feet, gave a glance at his shattered car and the people crowding round to Octave's assistance and jumped into the cab:
"Go to the Ministry of the Interior, on the Place Beauvau ... Twenty francs for yourself..."
He settled himself in the taxi and continued:
"No, no, he shall not die! No, a thousand times no, I will not have that on my conscience! It is bad enough to have been tricked by a woman and to have fallen into the snare like a schoolboy... That will do! No more blunders for me!
I have had that poor wretch arrested... I have had him sentenced to death... I have brought him to the foot of the scaffold ... but he shall not mount it! ...
Anything but that!
If he mounts the scaffold, there will be nothing left for me but to put a bullet through my head."
They were approaching the toll-house.
He leant out:
"Twenty francs more, driver, if you don't stop."
And he shouted to the officials:
"Detective-service!"
They passed through.
"But don't slow down, don't slow down, hang it!"
roared Lupin.
"Faster!
...
Faster still!
Are you afraid of running over the old ladies?
Never mind about them!
I'll pay the damage!"
In a few minutes, they were at the Ministry of the Interior.
Lupin hurried across the courtyard and ran up the main staircase.
The waiting-room was full of people.
He scribbled on a sheet of paper, "Prince Sernine," and, hustling a messenger into a corner, said:
"You know me, don't you? I'm Lupin. I procured you this berth; a snug retreat for your old age, eh? Only, you've got to show me in at once. There, take my name through. That's all I ask of you.
The premier will thank you, you may be sure of that ... and so I will... But, hurry you fool!
Valenglay is expecting me..."
Ten seconds later, Valenglay himself put his head through the door of his room and said:
"Show the prince in."
Lupin rushed into the room, slammed the door and, interrupting the premier, said:
"No, no set phrases, you can't arrest me... It would mean ruining yourself and compromising the Emperor... No, it's not a question of that. Look here. Malreich is innocent... I have discovered the real criminal... It's Dolores Kesselbach. She is dead. Her body is down there. I have undeniable proofs.
There is no doubt possible.
It was she..."
He stopped.
Valenglay seemed not to understand.
"But, look here, Monsieur le President, we must save Malreich... Only think ... a judicial error!
... An innocent man guillotined!
... Give your orders ... say you have fresh information ... anything you please ... but, quick, there is no time to lose..."
Valenglay looked at him attentively, then went to a table, took up a newspaper and handed it to him, pointing his finger at an article as he did so.
Lupin cast his eye at the head-line and read:
"EXECUTION OF THE MONSTER"
"Louis de Malreich underwent the death-penalty this morning..."
He read no more.
Thunderstruck, crushed, he fell into the premier's chair with a moan of despair...
How long he remained like that he could not say.
When he was outside again, he remembered a great silence and then Valenglay bending over him and sprinkling water on his forehead.
He remembered, above all, the premier's hushed voice whispering:
"Listen ... you won't say anything about this will you? Innocent, perhaps, I don't say not... But what is the use of revelations, of a scandal? A judicial error can have serious consequences. Is it worth while? ... A rehabilitation? For what purpose?
He was not even sentenced under his own name.
It is the name of Malreich which is held up to public execration ... the name of the real criminal, as it happens... So ..."
And, pushing Lupin gradually toward the door, he said:
"So go... Go back there... Get rid of the corpse... And let not a trace remain, eh?
Not the slightest trace of all this business...
I can rely on you, can I not?"
And Lupin went back.
He went back like a machine, because he had been told to do so and because he had no will left of his own.
He waited for hours at the railway-station.
Mechanically, he ate his dinner, took a ticket and settled down in a compartment.
He slept badly.
His brain was on fire between nightmares and half-waking intervals in which he tried to make out why Malreich had not defended himself:
"He was a madman ... surely ... half a madman...
He must have known her formerly ... and she poisoned his life ... she drove him crazy...
So he felt he might as well die... Why defend himself?"
The explanation only half satisfied him, and he promised himself sooner or later to clear up the riddle and to discover the exact part which Massier had played in Dolores' life. But what did it matter for the moment?
One fact alone stood out clearly, which was Massier's madness, and he repeated, persistently:
"He was a madman ... Massier was undoubtedly mad.
Besides, all those Massiers ... a family of madmen..."
He raved, mixing up names in his enfeebled brain.
But, on alighting at Bruggen Station, in the cool, moist air of the morning, his consciousness revived.
Things suddenly assumed a different aspect.
And he exclaimed:
"Well, after all, it was his own look-out!
He had only to protest...
I accept no responsibility...
It was he who committed suicide...
He was only a dumb actor in the play...
He has gone under...
I am sorry...
But it can't be helped!"
The necessity for action stimulated him afresh.
Wounded, tortured by that crime of which he knew himself to be the author for all that he might say, he nevertheless looked to the future:
"Those are the accidents of war," he said. "Don't let us think about it. Nothing is lost. On the contrary! Dolores was the stumbling-block, since Pierre Leduc loved her. Dolores is dead. Therefore Pierre Leduc belongs to me. And he shall marry Genevi&#232;ve, as I have arranged!
And he shall reign!
And I shall be the master!
And Europe, Europe is mine!"
He worked himself up, reassured, full of sudden confidence, and made feverish gestures as he walked along the road, whirling an imaginary sword, the sword of the leader whose will is law, who commands and triumphs:
"Lupin, you shall be king!
You shall be king, Ars&#232;ne Lupin!"
He inquired in the village of Bruggen and heard that Pierre Leduc had lunched yesterday at the inn.
Since then, he had not been seen.
"Oh?"
asked Lupin.
"Didn't he sleep here?"
"No."
"But where did he go after his lunch?"
"He took the road to the castle."
Lupin walked away in some surprise.
After all, he had told the young man to lock the doors and not to return after the servants had gone.
He at once received a proof that Pierre had disobeyed him: the park gates were open.
He went in, hunted all over the castle, called out.
No reply.
Suddenly, he thought of the chalet.
Who could tell?
Perhaps Pierre Leduc, worrying about the woman he loved and driven by an intuition, had gone to look for her in that direction.
And Dolores' corpse was there!
Greatly alarmed, Lupin began to run.
At first sight, there seemed to be no one in the chalet.
"Pierre!
Pierre!"
he cried.
Hearing no sound, he entered the front passage and the room which he had occupied.
He stopped short, rooted to the threshold.
Above Dolores' corpse, hung Pierre Leduc, with a rope round his neck, dead.
Lupin impatiently pulled himself together from head to foot. He refused to yield to a single gesture of despair. He refused to utter a single violent word.
After the cruel blows which fate had dealt him, after Dolores' crimes and death, after Massier's execution, after all those disturbances and catastrophes, he felt the absolute necessity of retaining all his self-command.
If not, his brain would undoubtedly give way...
"Idiot!"
he said, shaking his fist at Pierre Leduc.
"You great idiot, couldn't you wait?
In ten years we should have had Alsace-Lorraine again!"
To relieve his mind, he sought for words to say, for attitudes; but his ideas escaped him and his head seemed on the point of bursting.
"Oh, no, no!" he cried. "None of that, thank you! Lupin mad too! No, old chap! Put a bullet through your head, if you like; and, when all is said, I don't see any other way out. But Lupin drivelling, wheeled about in a bath-chair ... no!
Style, old fellow, finish in style!"
He walked up and down, stamping his feet and lifting his knees very high, as certain actors do when feigning madness.
And he said:
"Swagger, my lad, swagger! The eyes of the gods are upon you! Lift up your head! Pull in your stomach, hang it! Throw out your chest! ... Everything is breaking up around you. What do you care? ...
It's the final disaster, I've played my last card, a kingdom in the gutter, I've lost Europe, the whole world ends in smoke... Well ... and what of it?
Laugh, laugh!
Be Lupin, or you're in the soup... Come, laugh!
Louder than that, louder, louder!
That's right!
... Lord, how funny it all is!
Dolores, old girl, a cigarette!"
He bent down with a grin, touched the dead woman's face, tottered for a second and fell to the ground unconscious.
After lying for an hour, he came to himself and stood up.
The fit of madness was over; and, master of himself, with relaxed nerves, serious and silent, he considered the position.
He felt that the time had come for the irrevocable decisions that involve a whole existence. His had been utterly shattered, in a few days, under the assault of unforeseen catastrophes, rushing up, one after the other, at the very moment when he thought his triumph assured.
What should he do?
Begin again?
Build up everything again?
He had not the courage for it.
What then?
The whole morning, he roamed tragically about the park and gradually realized his position in all its slightest details.
Little by little, the thought of death enforced itself upon him with inflexible rigor.
But, whether he decided to kill himself or to live, there was first of all a series of definite acts which he was obliged to perform.
And these acts stood out clearly in his brain, which had suddenly become quite cool.
The mid-day Angelus rang from the church-steeple.
"To work!"
he said, firmly.
He returned to the chalet in a very calm frame of mind, went to his room, climbed on a stool, and cut the rope by which Pierre Leduc was hanging:
"You poor devil!"
he said.
"You were doomed to end like that, with a hempen tie around your neck.
Alas, you were not made for greatness: I ought to have foreseen that and not hooked my fortune to a rhymester!"
He felt in the young man's clothes and found nothing.
But, remembering Dolores' second pocket-book, he took it from the pocket where he had left it.
He gave a start of surprise.
The pocket-book contained a bundle of letters whose appearance was familiar to him; and he at once recognized the different writings.
"The Emperor's letters!" he muttered, slowly. "The old chancellor's letters! The whole bundle which I myself found at Leon Massier's and which I handed to Count von Waldemar! ... How did it happen? ... Did she take them in her turn from that blockhead of a Waldemar?"
And, suddenly, slapping his forehead, "Why, no, the blockhead is myself.
These are the real letters!
She kept them to blackmail the Emperor when the time came.
And the others, the ones which I handed over, are copies, forged by herself, of course, or by an accomplice, and placed where she knew that I should find them... And I played her game for her, like a mug!
By Jove, when women begin to interfere ... !"
There was only a piece of pasteboard left in the pocket-book, a photograph.
He looked at it.
It was his own.
"Two photographs ... Massier and I ... the two she loved best, no doubt ... For she loved me... A strange love, built up of admiration for the adventurer that I am, for the man who, by himself, put away the seven scoundrels whom she had paid to break my head!
A strange love!
I felt it throbbing in her the other day, when I told her my great dream of omnipotence.
Then, really, she had the idea of sacrificing Pierre Leduc and subjecting her dream to mine.
If the incident of the mirror had not taken place, she would have been subdued.
But she was afraid.
I had my hand upon the truth.
My death was necessary for her salvation and she decided upon it."
He repeated several times, pensively, "And yet she loved me...
Yes, she loved me, as others have loved me ... others to whom I have brought ill-luck also... Alas, all those who love me die! ...
And this one died too, strangled by my hand... What is the use of living? ...
What is the use of living?"
he asked again, in a low voice. "
Is it not better to join them, all those women who have loved me ... and who have died of their love ... Sonia, Raymonde, Clotilde, Destange, Miss Clarke? ..."
He laid the two corpses beside each other, covered them with the same sheet, sat down at a table and wrote:
"I have triumphed over everything and I am beaten.
I have reached the goal and I have fallen.
Fate is too strong for me... And she whom I loved is no more.
I shall die also."
And he signed his name:
"Arsène Lupin."
He sealed the letter and slipped it into a bottle which he flung through the window, on the soft ground of a flower-border.
Next, he made a great pile on the floor with old newspapers, straw and shavings, which he went to fetch in the kitchen.
On the top of it he emptied a gallon of petrol.
Then he lit a candle and threw it among the shavings.
A flame at once arose and other flames leapt forth, quick, glowing, crackling.
"Let's clear out," said Lupin. "The chalet is built of wood, it will all flare up like a match. And, by the time they come from the village, break down the gates and run to this end of the park, it will be too late.
They will find ashes, the remains of two charred corpses and, close at hand, my farewell letter in a bottle... Good-bye, Lupin!
Bury me simply, good people, without superfluous state ... a poor man's funeral ... No flowers, no wreaths... Just a humble cross and a plain epitaph; 'Here lies Arsène Lupin, adventurer.'"
He made for the park wall, climbed over it, and turning round, saw the flames soaring up to the sky...
He wandered back toward Paris on foot, bowed down by destiny, with despair in his heart.
And the peasants were amazed at the sight of this traveller who paid with bank-notes for his fifteen-penny meals.
Three foot-pads attacked him one evening in the forest.
He defended himself with his stick and left them lying for dead...
He spent a week at an inn.
He did not know where to go... What was he to do?
What was there for him to cling to?
He was tired of life.
He did not want to live...
"Is that you?"
Mme.
Ernemont stood in her little sitting-room in the villa at Garches, trembling, scared and livid, staring at the apparition that faced her.
Lupin!
...
It was Lupin.
"You!"
she said.
"You!
...
But the papers said ..."
He smiled sadly:
"Yes, I am dead."
"Well, then ... well, then ..." she said, naïvely.
"You mean that, if I am dead, I have no business here.
Believe me, I have serious reasons, Victoire."
"How you have changed!"
she said, in a voice full of pity.
"A few little disappointments...
However, that's over... Tell me, is Geneviève in?"
She flew at him, in a sudden rage:
"You leave her alone, do you hear? Geneviève? You want to see Geneviève, to take her back? Ah, this time I shall not let her out of my sight! She came back tired, white as a sheet, nervous; and the color has hardly yet returned to her cheeks.
You shall leave her alone, I swear you shall."
He pressed his hand hard on the old woman's shoulder:
"I will - do you understand?
- I will speak to her."
"No."
"I mean to speak to her."
"No."
He pushed her about.
She drew herself up and, crossing her arms:
"You shall pass over my dead body first, do you hear? The child's happiness lies in this house and nowhere else... With all your ideas of money and rank, you would only make her miserable. Who is this Pierre Leduc of yours? And that Veldenz of yours? Geneviève a grand-duchess!
You are mad.
That's no life for her! ...
You see, after all, you have thought only of yourself in this matter.
It was your power, your fortune you wanted.
The child you don't care a rap about.
Have you so much as asked yourself if she loved your rascally grand-duke?
Have you asked yourself if she loved anybody?
No, you just pursued your object, that is all, at the risk of hurting Geneviève and making her unhappy for the rest of her life... Well, I won't have it!
What she wants is a simple, honest existence, led in the broad light of day; and that is what you can't give her.
Then what are you here for?"
He seemed to waver, but, nevertheless, he murmured in a low voice and very sadly:
"It is impossible that I should never see her again, it is impossible that I should not speak to her..."
"She believes you dead."
"That is exactly what I do not want!
I want her to know the truth.
It is a torture to me to think that she looks upon me as one who is no more.
Bring her to me, Victoire."
He spoke in a voice so gentle and so distressed that she was utterly moved, and said:
"Listen... First of all, I want to know...
It depends upon what you intend to say to her... Be frank, my boy... What do you want with Geneviève?"
He said, gravely:
"I want to say this: 'Geneviève, I promised your mother to give you wealth, power, a fairy-like existence. And, on the day when I had attained my aim, I would have asked you for a little place, not very far from you.
Rich and happy, you would have forgotten - yes, I am sure of it - you would have forgotten who I am, or rather who I was.
Unfortunately, fate has been too strong for me.
I bring you neither wealth nor power.
And it is I, on the contrary, who have need of you.
Geneviève, will you help me?'"
"To do what?"
asked the old woman, anxiously.
"To live..."
"Oh!"
she said.
"Has it come to that, my poor boy?
..."
"Yes," he answered, simply, without any affectation of sorrow, "yes, it has come to that. Three human beings are just dead, killed by me, killed by my hands. The burden of the memory is more than I can bear. I am alone.
For the first time in my life, I need help.
I have the right to ask that help of Geneviève.
And her duty is to give it to me... If not ..."
"If not ...
?"
"Then all is over."
The old woman was silent, pale and quivering with emotion.
She once more felt all her affection for him whom she had fed at her breast and who still and in spite of all remained "her boy."
She asked:
"What do you intend to do with her?"
"We shall go abroad.
We will take you with us, if you like to come..."
"But you forget ... you forget..."
"What?"
"Your past..."
"She will forget it too.
She will understand that I am no longer the man I was, that I do not wish to be."
"Then, really, what you wish is that she should share your life, the life of Lupin?"
"The life of the man that I shall be, of the man who will work so that she may be happy, so that she may marry according to her inclination. We will settle down in some nook or other. We will struggle together, side by side.
And you know what I am capable of..."
She repeated, slowly, with her eyes fixed on his:
"Then, really, you wish her to share Lupin's life?"
He hesitated a second, hardly a second, and declared, plainly:
"Yes, yes, I wish it, I have the right."
"You wish her to abandon all the children to whom she has devoted herself, all this life of work which she loves and which is essential to her happiness?"
"Yes, I wish it, it is her duty."
The old woman opened the window and said:
"In that case, call her."
Geneviève was in the garden, sitting on a bench.
Four little girls were crowding round her.
Others were playing and running about.
He saw her full-face.
He saw her grave, smiling eyes.
She held a flower in her hand and plucked the petals one by one and gave explanations to the attentive and eager children.
Then she asked them questions.
And each answer was rewarded with a kiss to the pupil.
Lupin looked at her long, with infinite emotion and anguish. A whole leaven of unknown feelings fermented within him. He had a longing to press that pretty girl to his breast, to kiss her and tell her how he respected and loved her.
He remembered the mother, who died in the little village of Aspremont, who died of grief.
"Call her," said Victoire.
"Why don't you call her?"
He sank into a chair and stammered:
"I can't...
I can't do it...
I have not the right...
It is impossible... Let her believe me dead... That is better..."
He wept, his shoulders shaking with sobs, his whole being overwhelmed with despair, swollen with an affection that arose in him, like those backward flowers which die on the very day of their blossoming.
The old woman knelt down beside him and, in a trembling voice, asked:
"She is your daughter, is she not?"
"Yes, she is my daughter."
"Oh, my poor boy!"
she said, bursting into tears.
"My poor boy!
..."
EPILOGUE
THE SUICIDE
"To horse!"
said the Emperor.
He corrected himself, on seeing the magnificent ass which they brought him:
"To donkey, rather!
Waldemar, are you sure this animal is quiet to ride and drive?"
"I will answer for him as I would for myself, Sire," declared the count.
"In that case, I feel safe," said the Emperor, laughing.
And, turning to the officers with him, "Gentlemen, to horse!"
The market-place of the village of Capri was crowded with sight-seers, kept back by a line of Italian carabiniers, and, in the middle, all the donkeys of the place, which had been requisitioned to enable the Emperor to go over that island of wonders.
"Waldemar," said the Emperor, taking the head of the cavalcade, "what do we begin with?"
"With Tiberius's Villa, Sire."
They rode under a gateway and then followed a roughly-paved path, rising gradually to the eastern promontory of the island.
The Emperor laughed and enjoyed himself and good-humoredly chaffed the colossal Count von Waldemar, whose feet touched the ground on either side of the unfortunate donkey borne down under his weight.
In three-quarters of an hour, they arrived first at Tiberius's Leap, an enormous rock, a thousand feet high, from which the tyrant caused his victims to be hurled into the sea...
The Emperor dismounted, walked up to the hand-rail and took a glance at the abyss.
Then he went on foot to the ruins of Tiberius's Villa, where he strolled about among the crumbling halls and passages.
He stopped for a moment.
There was a glorious view of the point of Sorrento and over the whole island of Capri.
The glowing blue of the sea outlined the beautiful curve of the bay; and cool perfumes mingled with the scent of the citron-trees.
"The view is finer still, Sire," said Waldemar, "from the hermit's little chapel, at the summit."
"Let us go to it."
But the hermit himself descended by a steep path.
He was an old man, with a hesitating gait and a bent back.
He carried the book in which travellers usually write down their impressions.
He placed the book on a stone seat.
"What am I write?"
asked the Emperor.
"Your name, Sire, and the date of your visit ... and anything you please."
The Emperor took the pen which the hermit handed him and bent down to write.
"Take care, Sire, take care!"
Shouts of alarm ... a great crash from the direction of the chapel...
The Emperor turned round.
He saw a huge rock come rolling down upon him like a whirlwind.
At the same moment, he was seized round the body by the hermit and flung to a distance of ten yards away.
The rock struck against the stone seat where the Emperor had been standing a quarter of a second before and smashed the seat into fragments.
But for the hermit, the Emperor would have been killed.
He gave him his hand and said, simply:
"Thank you."
The officers flocked round him.
"It's nothing, gentlemen... We have escaped with a fright ... though it was a fine fright, I confess... All the same, but for the intervention of this worthy man ..."
And, going up to the hermit:
"What is your name, my friend?"
The hermit had kept his head concealed in his hood.
He pushed it back an inch or so and, in a very low voice, so as to be heard by none but the Emperor, he said:
"The name of a man, Sire, who is very pleased that you have shaken him by the hand."
The Emperor gave a start and stepped back.
Then, at once controlling himself:
"Gentlemen," he said to the officers, "I will ask you to go up to the chapel.
More rocks can break loose; and it would perhaps be wise to warn the authorities of the island.
You will join me later.
I want to thank this good man."
He walked away, accompanied by the hermit.
When they were alone, he said:
"You!
Why?"
"I had to speak to you, Sire.
If I had asked for an audience ... would you have granted my request?
I preferred to act directly and I intended to make myself known while Your Imperial Majesty was signing the book, when that stupid accident ..."
"Well?"
said the Emperor.
"The letters which I gave Waldemar to hand to you, Sire, are forgeries."
The Emperor made a gesture of keen annoyance:
"Forgeries?
Are you sure?"
"Absolutely sure, Sire."
"Yet that Malreich ..."
"Malreich was not the culprit."
"Then who was?"
"I must beg Your Imperial Majesty to treat my answer as secret and confidential.
The real culprit was Mrs.
Kesselbach."
"Kesselbach's own wife?"
"Yes, Sire.
She is dead now.
It was she who made or caused to be made the copies which are in your possession.
She kept the real letters."
"But where are they?"
exclaimed the Emperor.
"That is the important thing!
They must be recovered at all costs!
I attach the greatest value to those letters..."
"Here they are, Sire."
The Emperor had a moment of stupefaction.
He looked at Lupin, looked at the letters, then at Lupin again and pocketed the bundle without examining it.
Clearly, this man was puzzling him once more. Where did this scoundrel spring from who, possessing so terrible a weapon, handed it over like that, generously, unconditionally? It would have been so easy for him to keep the letters and to make such use of them as he pleased!
No, he had given his promise and he was keeping his word.
And the Emperor thought of all the astounding things which that man had done.
"The papers said that you were dead," he said.
"Yes, Sire.
In reality, I am dead.
And the police of my country, glad to be rid of me, have buried the charred and unrecognizable remains of my body."
"Then you are free?"
"As I always have been."
"And nothing attaches you to anything?"
"Nothing, Sire."
"In that case ..."
The Emperor hesitated and then, explicitly:
"In that case, enter my service.
I offer you the command of my private police.
You shall be the absolute master.
You shall have full power, even over the other police."
"No, Sire."
"Why not?"
"I am a Frenchman."
There was a pause.
The Emperor was evidently pleased with the answer.
He said:
"Still, as you say that no link attaches you ..."
"That is, one, Sire, which nothing can sever."
And he added, laughing, "I am dead as a man, but alive as a Frenchman.
I am sure that Your Imperial Majesty will understand."
The Emperor took a few steps up and down.
Then he said:
"I should like to pay my debt, however.
I heard that the negotiations for the grand-duchy of Veldenz were broken off..."
"Yes, Sire, Pierre Leduc was an imposter.
He is dead."
"What can I do for you?
You have given me back those letters... You have saved my life... What can I do?"
"Nothing, Sire."
"You insist upon my remaining your debtor?"
"Yes, Sire."
The Emperor gave a last glance at that strange man who set himself up in his presence as his equal.
Then he bowed his head slightly and walked away without another word.
"Aha, Majesty, I've caught you this time!"
said Lupin, following him with his eyes.
And, philosophically, "No doubt it's a poor revenge ... and would rather have recovered Alsace-Lorraine...
But still ..."
He interrupted himself and stamped his foot on the ground:
"You confounded Lupin!
Will you never change, will you always remain hateful and cynical to the last moment of your existence?
Be serious, hang it all!
The time has come, now or never, to be serious!"
He climbed the path that leads to the chapel and stopped at the place where the rock had broken loose.
He burst out laughing:
"It was a good piece of work and His Imperial Majesty's officers did not know what to make of it.
But how could they guess that I myself loosened that rock, that, at the last moment, I gave the decisive blow of the pick-axe and that the aforesaid rock rolled down the path which I had made between it and ... an emperor whose life I was bent on saving?"
He sighed:
"Ah, Lupin, what a complex mind you have!
All that trouble because you had sworn that this particular Majesty should shake you by the hand!
A lot of good it has done you!
'An Emperor's hand five fingers has, no more,' as Victor Hugo might have said."
He entered the chapel and, with a special key, opened the low door of a little sacristy.
On a heap of straw, lay a man, with his hands and legs bound and a gag in his mouth.
"Well, my friend, the hermit," said Lupin, "it wasn't so very long, was it? Twenty-four hours at the most... But I have worked jolly hard on your behalf! Just think, you have saved the Emperor's life! Yes, old chap. You are the man who saved the Emperor's life.
I have made your fortune, that's what I've done.
They'll build a cathedral for you and put up a statue to you when you're dead and gone.
Here, take your things."
The hermit, nearly dead with hunger, staggered to his feet.
Lupin quickly put on his own clothes and said:
"Farewell, O worthy and venerable man.
Forgive me for this little upset.
And pray for me.
I shall need it.
Eternity is opening its gate wide to me.
Farewell."