Nature satisfies by its loveliness, and without any mixture of corporeal benefit.
I see the spectacle of morning from the hill-top over against my house, from day-break to sun-rise, with emotions which an angel might share.
The long slender bars of cloud float like fishes in the sea of crimson light.
From the earth, as a shore, I look out into that silent sea.
I seem to partake its rapid transformations: the active enchantment reaches my dust, and I dilate and conspire with the morning wind.
How does Nature deify us with a few and cheap elements!
Give me health and a day, and I will make the pomp of emperors ridiculous.
The dawn is my Assyria; the sun-set and moon-rise my Paphos, and unimaginable realms of faerie; broad noon shall be my England of the senses and the understanding; the night shall be my Germany of mystic philosophy and dreams.
I do trust, my dearest, that you have been employing this bright day for both of us; for I have spent it in my dungeon, and the only light that broke upon me was when I opened your letter.
I am sometimes driven to wish that you and I could mount upon a cloud (as we used to fancy in those heavenly walks of ours), and be borne quite out of sight and hearing of all the world; for now all the people in the world seem to come between us.
How happy were Adam and Eve!
There was no third person to come between them, and all the infinity around them only served to press their hearts closer together.
We love one another as well as they; but there is no silent and lovely garden of Eden for us.
Will you sail away with me to discover some summer island?
Do you not think that God had reserved one for us, ever since the beginning of the world?
Foolish that I am to raise a question of it, since we have found such an Eden - such an island sacred to us two - whenever we have been together!
Then, we are the Adam and Eve of a virgin earth.
Now, good-by ; for voices are babbling around me, and I should not wonder if you were to hear the echo of them while you read this letter.
I was listening to some soothing tunes on the radio last night.
To be exact, it was 98.1, "Easy R&B Listening".
Usually when listeners call in, you know, they request a song and dedicate it to their sweetheart, or best friend, or a parent, or a soldier overseas.
It's natural thing, to share love with those around us.
But as I listening in, a man called in with a very unusual dedication.
" Hey, brother, I'd like to make a song request," he said.
" Sure thing.
Whom would you like to dedicate it to?"
the DJ asked.
" I want to dedicate this song to the whole world. "
" Whole world?
That's not possible. "
The DJ replied in a somewhat joking manner. "
We only reach a few million people. "
That brief conversation really hit home for me, though.
Yes, a song on a radio can only reach those listeners within the local geographic region that covers that frequency.
And yet, here was a listener who went beyond the idea of loving only those who we are supposed to love, and instead, he extended a heartfelt dedication which reached further than his own brother, his own child, his own wife, or father.
He sent a song to the universe!
It was powerful.
They say that a butterfly flapping its wings in Texas can create tornado in Brazil; and I say, the waves of generosity are more powerful than the vibrations of sound.
One kind act might truly change the world.
I wandered lonely as a cloud
That floats on high o'er vales and hills,
When all at once I saw a crowd,
A host, of golden daffodils;
Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.
Continuous as the stars that shine
And twinkle on the Milky Way,
They stretched in never-ending line
Along the margin of a bay:
Ten thousand saw I at a glance,
Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.
The waves beside them danced; but they
Out-did the sparkling waves in glee:
A poet could not but be gay,
In such a jocund company:
I gazed - and gazed - but little thought
What wealth the show to me had brought:
For oft, when on my couch I lie
In vacant or in pensive mood,
They flash upon that inward eye
Which is the bliss of solitude;
And then my heart with pleasure fills,
And dances with the daffodils.
Now that I am no longer young, I have friends whose mothers have passed away.
I have heard these sons and daughters say they never fully appreciated their mothers until it was too late to tell them.
I am blessed with the dear mother who is still alive.
I appreciate her more each day.
My mother does not change, but I do.
As I grow older and wiser, I realize what an extraordinary person she is.
How sad that I am unable to speak these words in her presence, but they flow easily from my pen.
How does a daughter begin to thank her mother for life itself?
For the love, the patience and the plain hard work that go into raising a child?
For running after a toddler, for understanding a moody teenager, for tolerating a college student who knows everything?
For waiting for the day when a daughter realizes how her mother really is?
How does a grown woman thank for a mother for continuing to be a mother?
For being ready with advice (when asked) or remaining silent when it is most appreciated?
For not saying "I told you so", when she could have uttered these words dozens of times?
For being essentially loving, thoughtful, patient, and forgiving?
I pray that I will look as good in the eyes of my children as my mother looks in mine.
A man may usually be known by the books he reads as well as by the company he keeps; for there is a companionship of books as well as of men; and one should always live in the best company, whether it be of books or of men.
A good book may be among the best of friends.
It is the same today that it always was, and it will never change.
It is the most patient and cheerful of companions.
It does not turn its back upon us in times of adversity or distress.
It always receives us with the same kindness; amusing and instructing us in youth, and comforting and consoling us in age.
Men often discover their affinity to each other by the mutual love they have for a book just as two persons sometimes discover a friend by the admiration which both entertain for a third.
There is an old proverb, "Love me, love my dog. "
But there is more wisdom in this: "Love me, love my book. "
The book is a truer and higher bond of union.
Men can think, feel, and sympathize with each other through their favorite author.
They live in him together, and he in them.
A good book is often the best urn of a life enshrining the best that life could think out; for the world of a man's life is, for the most part, but the world of his thoughts.
Thus the best books are treasuries of good words, the golden thoughts, which, remembered and cherished, become our constant companions and comforters.
Books possess an essence of immortality.
They are by far the most lasting products of human effort.
Temples and statues decay, but books survive.
Time is of no account with great thoughts, which are as fresh today as when they first passed through their author's minds, ages ago.
What was then said and thought still speaks to us as vividly as ever from the printed page.
The only effect of time has been to sift out the bad products; for nothing in literature can long survive but what is really good.
Books introduce us into the best society; they bring us into the presence of the greatest minds that have ever lived.
We hear what they said and did; we see them as if they were really alive; we sympathize with them, enjoy with them, grieve with them; their experience becomes ours, and we feel as if we were in a measure actors with them in the scenes which they describe.
The great and good do not die, even in this world.
Embalmed in books, their spirits walk abroad.
The book is a living voice.
It is an intellect to which one still listens.
One day a farmer's donkey fell into an abandoned well.
The animal cried piteously for hours as the farmer tried to figure out what to do.
Finally, he decided the animal was too old and the well needed to be covered up anyway; so it just wasn't worth it to him to try to retrieve the donkey.
He invited all his neighbors to come over and help him.
They each grabbed a shovel and began to shovel dirt into the well.
Realizing what was happening, the donkey at first cried and wailed horribly.
Then, a few shovel-falls later, he quieted down completely.
The farmer peered down into the well, and was astounded by what he saw.
With every shovel-full of dirt that hit his back, the donkey would shake it off and take a step up on the new layer of dirt.
As the farmer's neighbors continued to shovel dirt on top of the animal, he would shake it off and take a step up.
Pretty soon, the donkey stepped up over the edge of the well and trotted off, to the shock and astonishment of everyone.
Life is going to shovel dirt on you, all kinds of dirt.
The trick of getting out of the well is to stop wailing, and not let the dirt bury you, but to shake it off and take a step up.
Each one of our troubles is a stepping-stone.
We can get out of the deepest wells just by not stopping, never giving up!
Shake it off and take a step up!
This story happened in a small mountain village.
One day there was an earthquake.
Nothing was destroyed and no one was hurt.
But a huge rock fell from a nearby mountain and stopped in the middle of the road.
When the earthquake stopped, many people came to the road and saw the huge rock.
Some of the strongest men tried to lift the rock out of the road, but they couldn't move it.
They tried to push it but failed.
They tried to pull it with ropes but nothing worked.
" Well," they all agreed, "There's nothing we can do about it.
We'll have to change the road. "
At this time a boy of 12 years old said, "I think I can help you to move the rock. "
"You?"
they shouted, "What are you talking about?"
The men all laughed at the boy.
The next morning some people came into the street.
One of them shouted, "The rock is gone!"
More people ran out to see.
It was true.
The rock wasn't in the road any more.
It wasn't even near the road.
" This is impossible," they said, "Where did it go? "
The boy stood in the street, smiling, "I told you I could move it last night. "
The boy walked over to where the rock had been and uncovered some earth. "
I buried it," he said.
The people looked surprised. "
You see," he said, "I dug a deep hole next to the rock and I dug a small incline up to the rock and the rock rolled down into the hole by itself.
I covered it with earth. "
The crowds shouted, "What a clever boy!"
And some of them said, "Why haven't we thought of this good method? "
When my grandfather died, my 83-year-old grandmother, once full of life, slowly began to fade.
No longer able to manage a home of her own, she moved in with my mother, where she was visited often by other members of her large, loving family (two children, eight grandchildren, 22 great-grandchildren and two great-great-grandchildren).
Although she still had her good days, it was often hard to arouse her interest.
One chilly December afternoon three years ago, my daughter Meagan, then eight, and I were settling in for a long visit with "GG," as the family calls her, when she noticed that Meagan was carrying her favorite doll.
" I, too, had a special doll when I was a little girl," she told a wide-eyed Meagan, "I got it one Christmas when I was about your age.
I lived in an old farmhouse in Maine, with Mom, Dad and my four sisters, and the very first gift I opened that Christmas was the most beautiful doll you'd ever want to see.
" She had an exquisite, hand-painted porcelain face, and her long brown hair was pulled back with a big pink bow.
Her eyes were blue as blue could be, and they opened and closed.
I remember she had a body of kidskin, and her arms and legs bent at the joints. "
GG's voice dropped low, taking on an almost reverent tone. "
My doll was dressed in a dainty pink gown, trimmed with fine lace.
But what I especially remember was her petticoat.
It was fine batiste, trimmed with rows and rows of delicate lace.
And the tiny buttons on her boots were real.
Getting such a fine doll was like a miracle for a little farm girl like me - my parents must have had to sacrifice so much to afford it.
But how happy I was that morning! "
GG's eyes filled and her voice shook with emotion as she recalled that Christmas of long ago. "
I played with my doll all morning long.
She was such a beautiful doll… And then it happened.
My mother called us to the dining room for Christmas dinner and I laid my new doll down, ever so gently, on the hall table.
But as I went to join the family at the table, I heard a loud crash.
" I hardly had to turn round - I knew it was my precious doll.
I just knew it.
And it was.
Her lace petticoat had hung down from the table just enough for my baby sister to reach up and pull on it.
When I ran in from the dining room, there lay my beautiful doll on the floor, her face smashed into a dozen pieces.
I can still see my mother trying to put my poor doll together again.
But it couldn't be done.
She was gone forever. "
A few years later GG's baby sister was also gone , she told Meagan, a victim of pneumonia.
Now the tears in her eyes spilled over - tears, I knew, not only for a lost doll and a lost sister, but for a lost time.
Subdued for the rest of the visit, Meagan was no sooner in the car going home than she exclaimed, "Mom, I have a great idea!
Let's get GG a new doll for Christmas, one exactly like the doll that got broken.
Then she won't cry when she thinks about it. "
My heart filled with pride as I listened to my compassionate little daughter.
But where would we find a doll to match GG's fond memories?
Where there's a will, as they say, there's a way.
When I told my best friends, Liz and Chris, about my problem, Liz put me in touch with a local doll maker who made doll heads, hands and feet of a ceramic that closely resembled the old porcelain ones.
From her I commissioned a doll head in the style of three-quarters of a century ago - making sure to specify "big blue eyes that opened and closed," and hands and feet.
From a doll supply house I ordered a long brown wig and a kidskin body, and Meagan and I shopped for fabric, lace and ribbon to duplicate the outfit GG had so lovingly described.
Liz, who had some experience with a hot-glue gun, volunteered to put the doll together, and as the last days before Christmas raced by, Chris helped me make the doll's outfit, complete with lacy petticoat.
And while Liz, Chris and I searched for doll "boots with real buttons," Meagan wrote and illustrated the story of the lost doll.
Finally, our creation was finished.
To our eyes it was perfect.
But, of course, there was no way it could be exactly like the doll GG had loved so much and lost.
Would she think it looked anything like it?
On Christmas Eve, Meagan and I carried our gaily wrapped gift to GG, where she sat surrounded by children, parents, aunts, uncles, cousins. "
It's for you," Meagan said, "but first you have to read the story that goes with it. "
"Read it out loud," one of the other children demanded.
GG no sooner got through the first page than her voice cracked and she was unable to go on, but Meagan took over where she left off.
Then it was time to open her present.
I'll never forget the look on GG's face as she lifted the doll and held it to her chest.
Once again her tears fell, but this time they were tears of joy.
Cradling the doll in her frail arms, she repeated over and over again, "She's exactly like my old doll, exactly like her. "
And perhaps she wasn't just saying that to be kind.
Perhaps however impossible it seemed, we had managed to produce a close facsimile of the doll she remembered.
But as I watched my eight-year-old daughter and her great-grandmother examining the doll together, I thought of a likelier explanation.
What GG recognized, perhaps, was the love that inspired the gift.
And love, wherever it comes from, always looks the same.
Ah, who was it coloured that little frock, my child, and covered your sweet limbs with that little red tunic?
You have come out in the morning to play in the courtyard, tottering and tumbling as you run.
But who was it coloured that little frock, my child?
What is it makes you laugh, my little life-bud?
Mother smiles at you standing on the threshold.
She claps her hands and her bracelets jingle, and you dance with your bamboo stick in your hand like a tiny little shepherd.
But what is it makes you laugh, my little life-bud?
O beggar, what do you beg for, clinging to your mother's neck with both your hands?
O greedy heart, shall I pluck the world like a fruit from the sky to place it on your little rosy palm?
O beggar, what are you begging for?
The wind carries away in glee the tinkling of your anklet bells.
The sun smiles and watches your toilet.
The sky watches over you when you sleep in your mother's arms, and the morning comes tiptoe to your bed and kisses your eyes.
The wind carries away in glee the tinkling of your anklet bells.
The fairy mistress of dreams is coming towards you, flying through the twilight sky.
The world-mother keeps her seat by you in your mother's heart.
He who plays his music to the stars is standing at your window with his flute.
And the fairy mistress of dreams is coming towards you, flying through the twilight sky.
John was waiting for the girl whose heart he knew, but whose face he has not known, the girl with the rose.
Thirteen months ago, in a Florida library he took a book off the shelf and found himself intrigued with the notes in the margin.
The soft handwriting reflected a thoughtful soul and insightful mind.
In front of the book, he discovered the previous owner's name, Miss Hollis Maynell.
With time and effort he located her address.
He wrote her a letter introducing himself and inviting her to correspond.
During the next year and one month the two grew to know each other through the mail.
A romance was budding.
John requested a photograph, but she refused.
She felt that if he really cared, it wouldn't matter what she looked like.
Later they scheduled their first meeting - 7:00 p.m. at Grand Central Station in New York.
" You'll recognize me," she wrote, "by the red rose I'll be wearing on my lapel. "
So at 7:00 he was in the station looking for the girl with the red rose.
A young woman in a green suit was coming toward him, her figure long and slim and her eyes were blue as flowers.
Almost uncontrollably he made one step closer to her, and just at this moment he saw Hollis Maynell - a woman well past 40.
The girl was walking quickly away.
He felt as though he split in two, so keen was his desire to follow her, and yet so deep was his longing for the woman whose spirit had truly companioned him and upheld his own.
He did not hesitate.
He squared his shoulders and said, "I'm John, and you must be Miss Maynell.
I am so glad you could meet me; may I take you to dinner? "
The woman smiled. "
I don't know what this is about, son," she answered, "but the young lady in the green suit begged me to wear this rose on my coat.
And she said if you were to ask me out to dinner, I should tell you that she is waiting for you in the restaurant across the street.
She said it was some kind of test! "
Happiness is like a pebble dropped into a pool to set in motion an ever-widening circle of ripples.
As Stevenson has said, being happy is a duty.
There is no exact definition of the word happiness.
Happy people are happy for all sorts of reasons.
The key of happiness is not wealth or physical well-being, since we find beggars, invalids and so-called failures, who are extremely happy.
Being happy is a sort of unexpected dividend.
But staying happy is an accomplishment, a triumph of soul and character.
It is not selfish to strive for it.
It is, indeed, a duty to ourselves and others.
Being unhappy is like an infectious disease.
It causes people to shrink away from the sufferer.
He soon finds himself alone, miserable and embittered.
There is, however, a cure so simple as to seem, at first glance, ridiculous: if you don't feel happy, pretend to be!
It works.
Before long you will find that instead of repelling people, you attract them.
You discover how deeply rewarding it is to be the center of wider and wider circles of good will.
Then the make-believe becomes a reality.
You possess the secret of peace of mind, and can forget yourself in being of service to others.
Being happy, once it is realized as a duty and established as a habit, opens doors into unimaginable gardens thronged with grateful friends.
" Penn Station, " I told the cab driver.
The young, heavyset man peered at me through his sunglasses and motioned me to get in.
" I've got to get to JFK airport by 2:30 p.m. You think I'll be able to get there via LIRR (Long Island Rail Road) or should I cab it all the way? "
I asked him, as I got comfortable in the back seat.
"Hmmm.
You should be okay.
Yeah, you'll make it.
It will be much cheaper to take the train," he replied in a mild South Asian accent.
" Thanks," I told him.
Given his engaging nature, we naturally started a conversation, which went from the weather and quickly veered into the struggles of a cab driver's life.
" How long have you been driving cabs? "
" Three years. "
" You like it? "
" It's really hard work.
Not all people are so nice.
I get tired, but what can you do?
You have to pay the bills. "
" I hear you. "
Like most New York cab drivers, he accelerated constantly and braked often, zoomed through red lights, almost nicked a couple of cars and still, never broke a sweat.
" What do you do? "
he asked curiously.
" I help a nonprofit organization trying to bring some goodness in the world," I responded.
" Do they pay you well? "
" Well, no, but I get by.
I don't have many material things in life, the IRS would consider me poor, but you know, I've realized that I don't need all that to keep me happy.
If I die tomorrow, I want to go out knowing that I've made a few people smile. "
The young cab driver, perhaps in his late thirties, looked back through the sliding glass as if extending his hand for a hand shake - "Man, it is nice to meet you.
It is really nice to meet you. "
Although we were strangers, both of us felt deeply connected as human beings.
And by now, 7 minutes into our ride, we were on a first-name basis.
He even spelled his name for me: B-e-r-n-s-t-e-i-n.
Bernstein and I talked a bit about simple acts of generosity, the power of a pay-it-forward mindset and how that can promote trust and connection in our communities.
He understood the idea, but it seemed very abstract and foreign to him, so I gave him the example of a New Yerk restaurant I knew about: "So, you walk into this restaurant and you get a meal without paying for it.
Then your check says $0.00 - someone before you has paid for your meal, and you can pay-forward for the person after you.
You pay whatever you want for someone you don't know. "
" So who comes to this restaurant? "
" It's not like a soup-kitchen for the homeless; it's a place where everyone comes in. "
" Wow, really?
That is something. "
Our conversation was one of those lively, happy conversations.
We were both laughing it up and sharing stories, when he turned to me and said, "Can I keep in touch with you?
I want to help.
I want to be associated with this. "
Perhaps it broke protocol for a cab driver to ask for the business card of his customer, but Bernstein and I felt like old friends. "
Sure thing, buddy. "
We traded e-mail addresses as he informed me that he had a laptop at home from which he could check e-mails once every couple of days.
" You know what you could do, Bernstein? "
I suggested in a conspiring tone. "
You could give free ride to people every so often, and see how they respond.
Imagine the dinner conversation that they will have with their family that night. "
" Wow.
Yeah.
I will do it.
Every week, I can give away a $5 cab ride. "
After a reflective pause, he added, "Man, I'm moved. "
We arrived at Penn Station. "
$14.15" was the total.
I gave him $15, and was looking through my wallet for more when he immediately planted a dollar bill into my hands and insisted that I don't tip him - " No, no.
Please. "
It was 15 cents, but in his heart, Bernstein was giving me a free ride and I was blessed to receive it.
As I was heading out, I turned to him and said, "Bernstein, you know how we talked about this pay-it-forward idea; well, here's a $20.
Whenever you feel like it, you give a ride to people and tell them that someone before them has paid for their fare.
See what happens. "
Hearing this, Bernstein was visibly moved. "
Really?
Are you sure? "
"Absolutely. "
" I will give them your e-mail address too. "
" No, no.
This is not about you or I. Ask them to just pay it forward.
And here, give them this card," I said as I handed him a couple of Smile Cards.
Standing on the street, I looked in through the back window and said, "Alright, my friend, be well. "
Almost speechless, he repeated one last time:"Man, I'm moved. "
So was I.
Malia, a senior in high school, had wanted so badly for her dream to come true like Cinderella's dream came true.
She wanted to have at least one night with Prince Charming.
Malia had never had a boyfriend in her life, and most of the girls at her age have had many, many boyfriends.
So she was very jealous.
Although she was popular, Malia was very picky on who she wanted to be with, which is why she never had a boyfriend.
Many guys liked her, but none of them had ever told her they did because they were too worried they would get turned down.
They had no clue that she cried herself to sleep every night, wanting a boyfriend to hold her and tell her all of her troubles were going to be over soon.
None of the boys were courageous enough to tell her how they felt about her, so she would lay in agony every night thinking she was too ugly to have a boyfriend.
Her girl friends always told her not to worry about guys because they were nothing but trouble, and that she was too pretty for a boyfriend anyway.
Her friends' advice never helped her out very much, so she kept being scared of the future, thinking she'd be lonely for the rest of her life.
As the school dance coming up, Malia told one of her better guy friends that she'd go with him.
She went with him because they were close friends.
Her best friend was taking the guy that she really wanted to take.
It was an awkward situation because her friend wanted to go with who she was taking, and she wanted to take who her friend was taking.
The big dance came up, and when the girls got there, Malia made all the boys stare because of her beauty.
After her date and she got their table, her date left to dance with her best friend.
Malia sat at her table and watched her best friend dance with her date.
She was sad that her date had left her for her best friend.
About twenty minutes passed and she hadn't seen her best friend's date.
She wondered if he left, and she got the idea to leave herself.
As she grabbed her coat and purse, and walked down the steps of the dance hall, she felt something pull on her dress.
When she turned around, she saw the handsome face of her friend's date looking at her in shock.
" Why are you leaving the dance? "
he asked her.
He looked at her as though he didn't want her to leave.
" My date is dancing with my friend," she answered with a face as though it upset her, but she accepted her friend's decision.
" Won't you stay and talk with me for a while?"
He asked with fear of rejection.
Malia sat down and looked at him smiling.
She nodded her head.
As the two talked, he explained to her how she was anything but ugly, and how he had a crush on her since the day high school started.
Malia had explained to him that she felt the same way.
" Will you come in and dance with me?"
He asked.
Malia nodded and he took her hand and walked her in.
As they began to dance, she told him of her dreams to meet her Prince Charming.
And he asked her if he could be her Prince Charming.
She looked at him and smiled.
He spun her around to where he could hug her from behind her, and he whispered in her ear, "I've always wanted to be a Prince Charming.
I just never thought it would be with a princess so beautiful. "
Right at that moment, the tears started rolling down her face.
He put his head on her shoulder, and leaned forward to kiss her cheek.
He, then, turned her around and her face fell with the embarrassment of her tears.
He lifted her face up to his, and kissed her on the nose.
He hugged her tight and whispered in her ear, "Everything will be all right.
All of your troubles will soon go away. "
However mean your life is, meet it and live it;
do not shun it and call it hard names.
It is not so bad as you are.
It looks poorest when you are richest.
The fault-finder will find faults even in paradise.
Love your life, poor as it is.
You may perhaps have some pleasant, thrilling, glorious hours, even in a poor-house.
The setting sun is reflected from the windows of the almshouse as brightly as from the rich man's abode; the snow melts before its door as early in the spring.
I do not see but a quiet mind may live as contentedly there, and have as cheering thoughts, as in a palace.
The town's poor seem to me often to live the most independent lives of any.
Maybe they are simply great enough to receive without misgiving.
Most think that they are above being supported by the town; but it oftener happens that they are not above supporting themselves by dishonest means, which should be more disreputable.
Cultivate poverty like a garden herb, like sage.
There is no month in the whole year in which nature wears a more beautiful appearance than in the month of August.
Spring has many beauties, and May is a fresh and blooming month, but the charms of this time of year are enhanced by their contrast with the winter season.
August has no such advantage.
It comes when we remember nothing but clear skies, green fields, and sweet-smelling flowers - when the recollection of snow, and ice, and bleak winds, has faded from our minds as completely as they have disappeared from the earth, - and yet what a pleasant time it is!
Orchards and corn-fields ring with the hum of labour; trees bend beneath the thick clusters of rich fruit which bow their branches to the ground; and the corn, piled in graceful sheaves, or waving in every light breath that sweeps above it, as if it wooed the sickle, tinges the landscape with a golden hue.
A mellow softness appears to hang over the whole earth; the influence of the season seems to extend itself to the very wagon, whose slow motion across the well-reaped field, is perceptible only to the eye, but strikes with no harsh sound upon the ear.
Mother, the light has grown grey in the sky; I do not know what the time is.
There is no fun in my play, so I have come to you.
It is Saturday, our holiday.
Leave off your work, mother; sit here by the window and tell me where the desert of Tepantar in the fairy tale is?
The shadow of the rains has covered the day from end to end.
The fierce lightning is scratching the sky with its nails.
When the clouds rumble and it thunders, I love to be afraid in my heart and cling to you.
When the heavy rain patters for hours on the bamboo leaves, and our windows shake and rattle at the gusts of wind, I like to sit alone in the room, moter, with you, and hear you talk about the desert of Tepāntar in the fairy tale.
Where is it, mother, on the shore of what sea, at the foot of what hills, in the kingdom of what king?
There are no hedges there to mark the fields, no footpath across it by which the villagers reach their village in the evening, or the woman who gathers dry sticks in the forest can bring her load to the market.
With patches of yellow grass in the sand and only one tree where the pair of wise old birds have their nest, lies the desert of Tepantar.
I can imagine how, on just such a cloudy day, the young son of the king is riding alone on a grey horse through the desert, in search of the princess who lies imprisoned in the giant's palace across that unknown water.
When the haze of the rain comes down in the distant sky, and lightning starts up like a sudden fit of pain, does he remember his unhappy mother, abandoned by the king, sweeping the cow-stall and wiping her eyes, while he rides through the desert of Tepāntar in the fairy tale?
See, mother, it is almost dark before the day is over, and there are no travellers yonder on the village road.
The shepherd boy has gone home early from the pasture, and men have left their fields to sit on mats under the eaves of their huts, watching the scowling clouds.
Mother, I have left all my books on the shelf - do not ask me to do my lessons now.
When I grow up and am big like my father, I shall learn all that must be learnt.
But just for to-day, tell me, mother, where the desert of Tepāntar in the fairy tale is?
Can it really be sixty-two years ago that I first saw you?
It is truly a lifetime, I know.
But as I gaze into your eyes now, it seems like only yesterday that I first saw you, in that small cafe in Hanover Square.
From the moment I saw you smile, as you opened the door for that young mother and her newborn baby, I knew that I wanted to share the rest of my life with you.
I still think of how foolish I must have looked, as I gazed at you, that first time.
I remember watching you intently, as you took off your hat and loosely shook your short dark hair with your fingers.
I felt myself becoming immersed in your every detail, as you placed your hat on the table and cupped your hands around the hot cup of tea, gently blowing the steam away with your pouted lips.
From that moment, everything seemed to make perfect sense to me.
The people in the cafe and the busy street outside all disappeared into a hazy blur.
All I could see was you.
All through my life I have relived that very first day.
Many, many times I have sat and thought about that first day, and how for a few fleeting moments I am there, feeling again what is like to know true love for the very first time.
It pleases me that I can still have those feelings now after all those years, and I know I will always have them to comfort me.
Not even as I shook and trembled uncontrollably in the trenches, did I forget your face.
I would sit huddled into the wet mud, terrified, as the hails of bullets and mortars crashed down around me.
I would clutch my rifle tightly to my heart, and think again of that very first day we met.
I would cry out in fear, as the noise of war beat down around me.
But, as I thought of you and saw you smiling back at me, everything around me would become silent, and I would be with you again for a few precious moments, far from the death and destruction.
It would not be until I opened my eyes once again, that I would see and hear the carnage of the war around me.
I cannot tell you how strong my love for you was back then, when I returned to you on leave in the September, feeling battered, bruised and fragile.
We held each other so tight I thought we would burst.
I asked you to marry me the very same day and I whooped with joy when you looked deep into my eyes and said "yes" to being my bride.
I'm looking at our wedding photo now, the one on our dressing table, next to your jewellery box.
I think of how young and innocent we were back then.
I remember being on the church steps grinning like a Cheshire cat, when you said how dashing and handsome I looked in my uniform.
The photo is old and faded now, but when I look at it, I only see the bright vibrant colors of our youth.
I can still remember every detail of the pretty wedding dress your mother made for you, with its fine delicate lace and pretty pearls.
If I concentrate hard enough, I can smell the sweetness of your wedding bouquet as you held it so proudly for everyone to see.
I remember being so overjoyed, when a year later, you gently held my hand to your waist and whispered in my ear that we were going to be a family.
I know both our children love you dearly; they are outside the door now, waiting.
Do you remember how I panicked like a mad man when Jonathon was born?
I can still picture you laughing and smiling at me now, as I clumsily held him for the very first time in my arms.
I watched as your laughter faded into tears, as I stared at him and cried my own tears of joy.
Sarah and Tom arrived this morning with little Tessie.
Can you remember how we both hugged each other tightly when we saw our tiny granddaughter for the first time?
I can't believe she will be eight next month.
I am trying not to cry, my love, as I tell you how beautiful she looks today in her pretty dress and red shiny shoes, she reminds me so much of you that first day we met.
She has her hair cut short now, just like yours was all those years ago.
When I met her at the door her smile wrapped around me like a warm glove, just like yours used to do, my darling.
I know you are tired, my dear, and I must let you go.
But I love you so much it hurts to do so.
As we grew old together, I would tease you that you had not changed since we first met.
But it is true, my darling.
I do not see the wrinkles and grey hair that other people see.
When I look at you now, I only see your sweet tender lips and youthful sparkling eyes as we sat and had our first picnic next to that small stream, and chased each other around that big old oak tree.
I remember wishing those first few days together would last forever.
Do you remember how exciting and wonderful those days were?
I must go now, my darling.
Our children are waiting outside.
They want to say goodbye to you.
I wipe the tears away from my eyes and bend my frail old legs down to the floor, so that I can kneel beside you.
I lean close to you and take hold of your hand and kiss your tender lips for the very last time.
Sleep peacefully my dear.
I am sad that you had to leave me, but please don't worry.
I am content, knowing I will be with you soon.
I am too old and too empty now to live much longer without you.
I know it won't be long before we meet again in that small cafe in Hanover Square.
Goodbye, my darling wife.
When I was a child, my homesickness was a small stamp
Linking Mum at the other end and me this.
When I grew up, I remained homesick, but it became a ticket
By which I sailed to and from my bride at the other end.
Then homesickness took the shape of the grave,
Mum inside of it and me outside.
Now I'm still homesick, but it is a narrow strait
Separating me on this side and the mainland on the other.
Balzac once said artistic creation was "an exhausting struggle".
He believed that only by tenacious work and not being afraid of difficulties could you show your talent.
It was just like the soldiers charging the fortress, not relaxing your effort even for a moment.
Once Balzac wrote for hours on end, he was so tired that he could not hold out any longer.
He ran to a friend's home and plunged headlong onto the sofa.
He wanted to sleep, but he told his friend he must be woken up within an hour.
His friend, seeing him so tired, did not wake him up on time.
After he woke up, Balzac got very angry at his friend.
Fortunately his friend had an intimate understanding of him and did not quarrel with him.
Balzac did not smoke cigarettes, nor did he drink any alcohol.
But he got one habit: while he was writing he always drank very strong coffee that could almost anaesthetize his stomach.
He didn't add milk, nor did he add sugar in his coffee.
It would not satisfy him until it was made bitter.
People generally did not like to drink such bitter coffee.
That had a strange stimulus effect on him, and could help him drive the sleepiness away, according to himself.
Two roads diverged in a yellow wood,
And sorry I could not travel both
And be one traveler, long I stood
And looked down one as far as I could
To where it bent in the undergrowth;
Then took the other, as just as fair,
And having perhaps the better claim,
Because it was grassy and wanted wear;
Though as for that, the passing there
Had worn them really about the same,
And both that morning equally lay
In leaves no step had trodden black.
Oh, I kept the first for another day!
Yet knowing how way leads on to way,
I doubted if I should ever come back.
I shall be telling this with a sigh
Somewhere ages and ages hence:
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I -
I took the one less traveled by,
And that has made all the difference.
In 1974, when we were fourteen years old, Howard and I became close friend.
We used to sit in his front yard, eat cookies and talk for hours.
Howard had a girlfriend and I had a boyfriend, but I thought he was one of the nicest boys at our school.
A few years after graduation, I received an invitation to Howard's wedding.
I arrived alone and waiting outside was Howard, receiving me with the kind and welcoming smile I had always known.
We talked a while, and for some reason I turned and went back to my car and went home.
We lost touch for several years.
At our ten-year class reunion I looked up and, once again, there was that familiar smile.
It was Howard. "
What happened to you? "
I asked. "
I've been getting divorced," he said with a twinkle in his eye. "
Where have you been? "
" I've been married," I responded.
We sat and reminisced all evening, promising to keep in touch.
We contacted one another a couple of times a year and kept each other up on what was going on in our lives, but never saw each other until eight years later.
My marriage ended and I found myself living alone in an apartment with my little daughter.
Howard called and asked: "Is there anything I can do for you?
Is your car running okay?
Does your daughter need anything?
Do you have enough money? "
I told him: "I need to see my old friend.
It's been too many years. "
So we met for a beer, and once again, sat and went over old times.
The hours flew by and next thing we knew we were asked to leave.
The restaurant had closed.
We got together a couple of more times and found ourselves talking until the sun came up.
As Howard left, I found myself sad watching him go.
One evening, I invited Howard over to have dinner.
He came over and brought photo albums.
As we went through the albums, I felt compelled to tell him that I felt I might be falling in love with him.
Mortified with myself, I went in the bathroom and tried to figure out how I could escape from a three-floor-apartment bathroom without being discovered!
I was afraid I had just destroyed a precious friendship.
I had stepped on hallowed ground.
When I returned, Howard was sitting there with a Cheshire cat smile on his face. "
Tracy, I have loved you for twenty years.
You have been the standard I have judged all women by.
I don't want to let this opportunity slip past me. "
I told him that I was afraid that if it didn't work out, we would lose this priceless friendship that we had carried through the years.
We agreed our friendship wouldn't be broken and that we had the potential here for something rare and priceless.
Sure enough, we were married nine months later.
Engraved in our wedding rings are the words "To Infinity".
With my daughter, we became a family.
One day we came across his high school yearbook and decided to look up what I had written to him all those years ago.
It was so many years back that I'd forgotten.
There was my handwriting.
A full page long.
And there I had written: "Howard, you are the nicest boy I have ever met.
I know we will be friends for the rest of our lives … In fact, I love you so much that I think when grow up we should just get MARRIED. "
Who'd thought all those years ago as we sat in his front yard eating cookies that those two young kids really would be friends… and lovers forever… to infinity?
A group of working adults got together to visit their university lecturer.
The lecturer was happy to see them, and conversation soon turned into complaints about stress in work and life.
The lecturer just smiled and went to the kitchen to get an assortment of cups, some in porcelain, some in plastic, some in glass, some plain looking and some looked rather expensive and exquisite.
The lecturer offered his former students the cups to get drinks for themselves.
When all the students had a cup in hand with water, the lecturer spoke, "If you noticed, all the nice looking, expensive cups were taken up, leaving behind the plain and cheap ones.
While it is normal that you only want the best for yourselves, that is the source of your problems and stress.
What all of you wanted was water, not the cup, but we unconsciously went for the better cups. "
Just like in life, if life is water, then the jobs, money and position in society are the cups.
They are just tools to hold life, but the quality of life doesn't change.
If we only concentrate on the cup, we won't have time to enjoy the water in it.
It was Thanksgiving morning and in the crowded kitchen of my small home I was busy preparing the traditional Thanksgiving turkey when the doorbell rang.
I opened the front door and saw two small children in rags huddling together inside the storm door on the top step.
" Any old papers, lady? "
I was busy.
I wanted to say no - until I looked down at their feet.
Thin little shoes, sopped with sleet.
"Come in and I'll make you a cup of hot cocoa. "
There was no conversation.
Their soggy shoes left marks upon the hearthstone.
I served them cocoa and toast with jam to fortify against the chill outside.
Then I went back to the kitchen and started again on my household budget.
The silence in the front room struck through to me.
I looked in.
The girl held the empty cup in her hands, looking at it.
The boy asked in a flat voice, "Lady… is you rich? "
" Am I rich?
Mercy, no! "
I looked at my shabby slipcovers.
The girl put her cup back in its saucer - carefully.
" Your cups match your saucers. "
Her voice was old, with a hunger that was not of the stomach.
They left then, holding their bundles of papers against the wind.
They hadn't said "thank you".
They didn't need to.
They had done more than that.
Plain blue pottery cups and saucers.
But they matched.
I tasted the potatoes and stirred the gravy.
Potatoes and brown gravy, a roof over our heads, my man with a good steady job - these things matched, too.
I moved the chairs back from the fire and tidied the living room.
The muddy prints of small shoes were still wet upon my hearth.
I let them be.
I want them there in case I ever forget again how very rich I am.
What is the secret ingredient of tough people that enables them to succeed?
Why do they survive the tough times when others are overcome by them?
Why do they win when others lose?
Why do they soar when others sink?
The answer is very simple.
It's all in how they perceive their problems.
Yes, every living person has problems.
A problem-free life is an illusion - a mirage in the desert.
Accept that fact!
Every mountain has a peak.
Every valley has its low point.
Life has its ups and downs, its peaks and its valleys.
No one is up all the time, nor are they down all the time.
Problems do end.
You may not be able to control the times, but you can compose your responses.
You may not have chosen your tough time, but you can choose how you will react to it.
For instance, what is the positive reaction to a terrible financial setback?
In this situation would it be the positive reaction to cop out and run away?
Escape through alcohol, drug, or suicide?
No!
Such negative reactions only produce greater problems by promising a temporary "solution" to the pressing problem.
The positive solution to a problem may require courage to initiate it.
When you control your reaction to the seemingly uncontrollable problem of life, then in fact you do control the problem's effect on you.
Your reaction to the problem is the last word!
What will you let this problem do to you?
It can make you tender or tough.
It can make you better or bitter.
It all depends on you.
In the final analysis, the tough people who survive the tough times do so because they've chosen to react positively to their predicament.
Tough times never last, but tough people do.
History teaches us that every problem has a lifespan.
No problem is permanent.
I know now that the man who sat with me on the old wooden stairs that hot summer night over thirty-five years ago was not a tall man.
But to a five-year-old, he was a giant.
We sat side by side, watching the sun go down behind the old Texaco service station across the busy street.
A street that I was never allowed to cross unless accompanied by an adult, or at the very least, an older sibling.
Cherry-scented smoke from Grandpa's pipe kept the hungry mosquitoes at bay while gray, wispy swirls danced around our heads.
Now and again, he blew a smoke ring and laughed as I tried to target the hole with my finger.
I, clad in a cool summer nightie, and Grandpa, in his sleeveless T-shirt, sat watching the traffic.
We counted cars and tried to guess the color of the next one to turn the corner.
Once again, I was caught in the middle of circumstances.
The fourth born of six children, it was not uncommon that I was either too young or too old for something.
This night I was both.
While my two baby brothers slept inside the house, my three older siblings played with friends around the corner, where I was not allowed to go.
I stayed with Grandpa, and that was okay with me.
I was where I wanted to be.
My grandfather was baby-sitting while my mother, father and grandmother went out.
"Thirsty? "
Grandpa asked, never removing the pipe from his mouth.
" Yes, " was my reply.
" How would you like to run over to the gas station there and get yourself a bottle of Coke? "
I couldn't believe my ears.
Had I heard right?
Was he talking to me?
On my family's modest income, Coke was not a part of our budget or diet.
A few tantalizing sips were all I had ever had, and certainly never my own bottle.
" Okay," I replied shyly, already wondering how I would get across the street.
Surely Grandpa was going to come with me.
Grandpa stretched his long leg out straight and reached his huge hand deep into the pocket.
I could hear the familiar jangling of the loose change he always carried.
Opening his fist, he exposed a mound of silver coins.
There must have been a million dollars there.
He instructed me to pick out a dime.
After he deposited the rest of the change back into his pocket, he stood up.
" Okay," he said, helping me down the stairs and to the curb, "I'm going to stay here and keep an ear out for the babies.
I'll tell you when it's safe to cross.
You go over to the Coke machine, get your Coke and come back out.
Wait for me to tell you when it's safe to cross back. "
My heart pounded.
I clutched my dime tightly in my sweaty palm.
Excitement took my breath away.
Grandpa held my hand tightly.
Together we looked up the street and down, and back up again.
He stepped off the curb and told me it was safe to cross.
He let go of my hand and I ran.
I ran faster than I had ever run before.
The street seemed wide.
I wondered if I would make it to the other side.
Reaching the other side, I turned to find Grandpa.
There he was, standing exactly where I had left him, smiling proudly.
I waved.
"Go on, hurry up! "
he yelled.
My heart pounded wildly as I walked inside the dark garage.
I had been inside the garage before with my father.
My surroundings were familiar.
I heard the Coca-Cola machine motor humming even before I saw it.
I walked directly to the big old red-and-white dispenser.
I knew where to insert my dime.
I had seen it done before and had fantasized about this moment many times.
The big old monster greedily accepted my dime, and I heard the bottles shift.
On tiptoes I reached up and opened the heavy door.
There they were: one neat row of thick green bottles, necks staring directly at me, and ice-cold from the refrigeration.
I held the door open with my shoulder and grabbed one.
With a quick yank, I pulled it free from its bondage.
Another one immediately took its place.
The bottle was cold in my sweaty hands.
I will never forget the feeling of the cool glass on my skin.
With two hands, I positioned the bottleneck under the heavy brass opener that was bolted to the wall.
The cap dropped into an old wooden box, and I reached in to retrieve it.
It was cold and bent in the middle, but I knew I needed to have this souvenir.
Coke in hand, I proudly marched back out into the early evening dusk.
Grandpa was waiting patiently.
He smiled.
"Stop right there," he yelled.
One or two cars sped by me, and once again, Grandpa stepped off the curb. "
Come on, now," he said, "run. "
I did.
Cool brown foam sprayed over my hands. "
Don't ever do that alone, " he warned.
I held the Coke bottle tightly, fearful he would make me pour it into a cup, ruining this dream come true.
He didn't.
One long swallow of the cold beverage cooled my sweating body.
I don't think I ever felt so proud.
If you can keep your head when all about you
Are losing theirs and blaming it on you;
If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,
But make allowance for their doubting too;
If you can wait and not be tired by waiting,
Or being lied about, don't deal in lies,
Or being hated, don't give way to hating,
And yet don't look too good, nor talk too wise;
If you can dream - and not make dreams your master;
If you can think - and not make thoughts your aim;
If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster
And treat those two impostors just the same;
If you can bear to hear the truth you've spoken
Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools,
Or watch the things you gave your life to, broken,
And stoop and build 'em up with worn-out tools;
If you can make one heap of all your winnings
And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss,
And lose, and start again at your beginnings
And never breathe a word about your loss;
If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew
To serve your turn long after they are gone,
And so hold on when there is nothing in you
Except the Will which says to them, "Hold on! "
If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue,
Or walk with Kings - nor lose the common touch;
If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you;
If all men count with you, but none too much;
If you can fill the unforgiving minute
With sixty seconds' worth of distance run,
Yours is the Earth and everything that's in it,
And - which is more - you'll be a Man, my son!
North of the Alps, the everlasting winter is interrupted by summers that struggle and soon yield; south of the Alps, the everlasting summer is interrupted by spasmodic and spiteful winters that never get a real hold, but that are mean and dogged.
The in-between, in either case, is just as it may be.
But the lands of the sun are south of the Alps, forever.
In the morning, the sun shines strong on the horizontal green cloud-puffs of the pines, the sky is clear and full of life, the water runs hastily, still browned by the last juice of crushed olives.
And there the earth's bowl of crocuses is amazing.
You cannot believe that the flowers are really still.
They are open with such delight, and their pistil is so red-orange, and they are so many, all reaching out wide and marvelous, that it suggests a perfect ecstasy of radiant, thronging movement, lit-up violet and orange, and surging in some invisible rhythm of concerted, delightful movement.
You cannot believe they do not move, and make some sort of crystalline sound of delight.
If you sit still and watch, you begin to move with them, like moving with the stars, and you feel the sound of their radiance.
All the little cells of the flowers must be leaping with flowery life and utterance.
And now that it is March, there is a rush of flowers.
Down by the other stream, which turns sideways to the sun, and tangles the brier and bramble, down where the hellebore has stood so wan and dignified all winter, there are now white tufts of primroses, suddenly come.
Among the tangle and near the water-lip, tufts and bunches of primroses, in abundance.
Yet they look more wan, more pallid, more flimsy than English primroses.
They lack some of the full wonder of the northern flowers.
One tends to overlook them, to turn to the great, solemn-faced purple violets that rear up from the bank, and above all, to the wonderful little towers of the grape hyacinth.
This is the time, in March, when the sloe is white and misty in the hedge-tangle by the stream, and on the slope of land the peach tree stands pink and alone.
The almond blossom, silvery pink, is passing, but the peach, deep-toned, bluey, not at all ethereal, this reveals itself like flesh, and the trees are like isolated individuals, the peach and the apricot.
It is so conspicuous and so individual, that pink among the coming green of spring, because the first flowers that emerge from winter seem always white or yellow or purple.
Now the celandines are out, and along the edges of the podere, the big, sturdy, black-purple anemones, with black hearts.
The daisies are out too, in sheets, and they too red-mouthed.
The first ones are big and handsome.
But as March goes on, they dwindle to bright little things, like tiny buttons, clouds of them together.
That means summer is nearly here.
In some places there are old yellow tulips, slender and spiky.
They are very lovely, pricking out their dulled yellow in slim spikes.
But they too soon lean, expand beyond themselves, and are gone like an illusion.
And when the tulips are gone, there is a moment's pause, before summer.
Summer is the next move.
In the pause towards the end of April, when the flowers seem to hesitate, the leaves make up their minds to come out.
For sometime, at the very ends of the bare boughs of fig trees, spurts of pure green have been burning like little cloven tongues of green fire vivid on the tips of the candelabrum.
Now these spurts of green spread out, and begin to take the shape of hands, feeling for the air of summer.
And tiny green figs are below them, like glands on the throat of a goat.
Now the aspens on the hill are all remarkable with the translucent membranes of blood-veined leaves.
They are gold-brown, but not like autumn, rather like thin-winged bats when like birds - call them birds - they wheel in clouds against the setting sun, and the sun glows through the stretched membrane of their wings, as through thin, brown-red stained glass.
This is the red sap of summer, not the red dust of autumn.
The cherry tree is something the same, but more sturdy.
Now, in the last week of April, the cherry blossom is still white, but waning and passing away: it is late this year, and the leaves are clustering thick and softly copper in their dark blood-filled glow.
It is queer about fruit trees in this district.
The pear and the peach were out together.
But now the pear tree is a lovely thick softness of new and glossy green, vivid with a tender fullness of apple-green leaves, gleaming among all the other green of the landscape, the half-high wheat, emerald, and the grey olive, half-invisible, the browning green of the dark cypress, the black of the evergreen oak, the rolling of the heavy green puffs of the stone-pines, the flimsy green of small peach and almond trees, the sturdy young green of horse-chestnut.
So many greens, all in flakes and shelves and tilted tables and round shoulders and plumes and shags and uprisen bushes, of greens and greens, sometimes blindingly brilliant at evening, when the landscape looks as if it were on fire from inside, with greenness and with gold.
In the wood, the scrub-oak is only just coming uncrumpled, and the pines keep their hold on winter.
They are wintry things, stone-pines.
At Christmas, their heavy green clouds are richly beautiful.
When the cypresses rise their tall and naked bodies of dark green, and the osiers are vivid red-orange, on the still blue air, and the land is lavender; then, in mid-winter, the landscape is most beautiful in colour, surging with colour.
Not that this week is flowerless.
But the flowers are a little lonely things, here and there: the early purple orchid, ruddy and very much alive, you come across occasionally, then the little groups of bee-orchids, with their ragged concerted indifference to their appearance.
Also there are the huge bud-spikes of the stout, thick-flowering pink orchid, huge buds like fat ears of wheat, hard-purple, and splendid.
But already odd grains of the wheat-ear are open, and out of the purple hangs the delicate pink rag of floweret.
Also there are very lovely and choice cream-coloured orchids with brown spots on the long and delicate lip.
These grow in the more moist places, and have exotic tender spikes, very rare-seeming.
Another orchid is a little pretty yellow one.
By May, the nightingale will sing an unbroken song, and the discreet barely audible Tuscan cuckoo will be a little more audible.
Then the lovely pale-lilac irises will come out in all their showering abundance of tender, proud, spiky bloom, till the air will gleam with mauve, and a new crystalline lightness will be everywhere.
There will be tufts of iris everywhere, arising up proud and tender.
When the rose-coloured wild gladiolus is mingled in the corn, and the love-in-a-mist opens blue: in May and June, before the corn is cut.
But as yet is neither May nor June, but the end of April, the pause between spring and summer, the nightingale singing uninterrupted, the bean-flowers dying in the bean-fields, the bean-perfume passing with spring, the little birds hatching in the nests, the olives pruned, and the vines, the last bit of late ploughing finished, and not much work to hand, now, not until the peas are ready to pick, in another two weeks or so.
So the change, the endless and rapid change.
In the sunny countries, the change seems more vivid, and more complete than in the grey countries.
In the grey countries, there is a grey or dark permanency, over whose surface passes change ephemeral, leaving no real mark.
But in the sunny countries, change is the reality and permanence is artificial and a condition of imprisonment.
Hence, to the northerner, the phenomenal world is essentially tragical, because it is temporal and must cease to exist.
Its very existence implies ceasing to exist, and this is the root of the feeling of tragedy.
But to the southerner, the sun is so dominant that shadow, or dark, is only merely relative: merely the result of something getting between one and the sun.
In the human race, the one thing that is always there is the shining sun, and dark shadow is an accident of intervention.
For my part, if the sun always shines, and always will shine, in spite of millions of clouds of words.
In the sunshine, even death is sunny.
And there is no end to the sunshine.
That is why the rapid change of the Tuscan spring is utterly free, for me, of any senses of tragedy.
The sun always shines.
It is our fault if we don't think so.
Recently I turned to a friend who was riding in my car and asked her, "What do you like about yourself? "
We rode in silence for several minutes.
Finally, she turned to me and said, apologetically, "I can't think of anything. "
I was stunned.
My friend is intelligent, charming, and compassionate - yet she couldn't see any of that.
I know she's not alone.
Low self-esteem has become the number-one issue plaguing women.
Despite God's assurance that he's absolutely crazy about us, most of us can't believe he means us.
It's like the cynical editor who tells the cub reporter, "If your mother says she loves you, check it out. "
I was a reporter for 12 years.
One of the first things I learned in researching a story was "garbage in, garbage out. "
If your raw data is flawed, you end up with a faulty conclusion.
The same is true with how we see ourselves.
If we lack self-confidence, maybe we're working with flawed data.
The reality is, in hundreds of subtle ways, our culture, family, friends - even our thought life - conspire to undermine our confidence.
We grow up in families void of affirmation, encouragement, and respect - the building blocks to self-confidence.
Then we find ourselves smack-dab in the middle of a world that lionizes Hollywood starlets and Barbie-doll figures.
Our paycheck, our title, or some other artificial yardstick gives us temporary entree into the world of The Accepted.
But in our hearts, we know it isn't real.
How do we find our way to the truth?
I'm technophobia.
My brother got all the genes required to understand operating manuals, to repair things, or to make sense of computers.
When I first had to learn how to use a computer for my job, I was convinced it was the end of life as I knew it.
I remember with painful clarity a beginner's computer class where the instructor told us to "press any key".
I searched in vain for the "any" key.
By the end of the class, I was certain I wasn't smart enough to drive myself home, much less dress for work the next day.
This was despite the fact that I managed a home, a family, a job, and a professional staff.
Why was it so humiliating?
Because I compared myself to the 10-year-old girl next door who effortlessly surfed the Internet to research her term papers while I struggled just to log on.
Instead of simply concluding that technical prowess is not one of my strengths, I concluded I must be stupid.
It was a lie.
People respect us as much as we respect ourselves.
That's why the absence of self-confidence can telegraph to others not to believe in us.
For years I struggled to receive a compliment graciously.
If someone complimented my hair, I'd discount it.
I'd say my hairstyle made my face look fat or that my hair was a mousy color.
What I really meant was, there must be some mistake.
I'm not worth your regard.
I don't like myself and can't really believe you do, either.
The trouble is, if we persist in putting ourselves down, eventually people start to believe we're right.
Sometimes the problem isn't faulty data.
We have an accurate picture of ourselves or a situation, but we capitulate the first time someone challenges us.
Several years ago, I discovered a grape-sized lump on my left breast.
My doctor scheduled outpatient surgery right away.
A month later, when I resumed periodic self-examination, I felt the same lump in the same hard-to-reach place.
I was certain of it!
When I called the doctor to suggest he might have missed the lump in question, he insisted I was wrong.
It could not possibly be a lump, he said, because he had removed it.
After all, he was the doctor.
I got off the phone, doubting what I'd felt with my own hand, but fear of lethal consequences gave me the courage to insist he re-examine me, at which point he reluctantly acknowledged that, yes, it did seem to be the original lump.
He removed it in a second surgery.
In my case, I had to confess that I was stupid because I didn't understand technical things.
Yet, even after acknowledging that I'm actually a pretty intelligent person, I still had to grieve the fact that no amount of classes or training would ever completely solve my technical ineptitude!
Another lie believed about myself was that I'd been selfish for having only one child.
The truth is, I nearly died giving birth to my daughter, and my husband didn't want to adopt.
Still, I spent years feeling like an inferior mother - like I should have trusted God to protect me in subsequent childbirth.
I now believe that - in my case - one child was God's will for me.
I've rejected the condemnation.
Nevertheless, I had to grieve that I'd never have the houseful of children I'd always wanted.
When my husband and I celebrated our 38th wedding anniversary at our favorite restaurant, Lenny, the piano player, asked, "How did you do it? "
I knew there was no simple answer, but as the weekend approached, I wondered if one reason might be our ritual of breakfast in bed every Saturday and Sunday.
It all started with the breakfast tray my mother gave us as a wedding gift.
It had a glass top and slatted wooden side pockets for the morning paper - the kind you used to see in the movies.
Mother loved her movies, and although she rarely had breakfast in bed, she held high hopes for her daughter.
My adoring bridegroom took the message to heart.
My husband prepared breakfast ever since the beginning of our marriage.
Feeling guilty, I suggested we take turns.
Despite grumblings - "hate crumbs in my bed " - Sunday morning found my spouse eagerly awaiting his tray.
Soon these weekend breakfasts became such a part of our lives that I never even thought about them.
I only knew we treasured this separate, blissful time - to read, relax, forget the things we should remember.
Sifting through the years, I recalled how our weekends changed, but that we still preserved the ritual.
We started our family (as new parents, we slept after breakfast more than we read), but we always found our way back to where we started, just two for breakfast, one on Saturday and one on Sunday.
When we had more time, my tray became more festive.
First it was fruit slices placed in geometric pattern; then came flowers from our garden - sometimes just one blossom sprouting from a grapefruit half.
This arranger of mine had developed a flair for decorating, using everything from amaryllis to the buds of a maple tree.
My husband said my cooking inspired him.
Mother would have approved.
Perhaps it was the Saturday when the big strawberry wore a daisy hat that I began to think, how can I top this?
One dark winter night I woke with a vision of a snowman on a tray.
That Sunday I scooped a handful of snow and in no time had my man made.
With a flourish I put a miniature pinecone on his head.
As I delivered the tray, complete with a nicely frozen snowman, I waited for a reaction.
There was none - but as I headed down the stairs I heard a whoop of laughter and then, "You've won!
Yes, sir, you've won the prize! "
Amy was eight years old when she heard her Mom and Dad talking about her little brother, Tom.
All she knew was that he was very sick and they were completely out of money.
They were moving to an apartment complex next month because Daddy didn't have the money for both the doctor bills and the house payment.
Only a very costly surgery could save her brother now and it was looking like there was no one to loan them the money.
She heard her Dad say to her Mom, "Only a miracle can save him now. "
Amy went to her bedroom and pulled a glass jelly jar from its hiding place in the closet.
She poured all the change out on the floor and counted it carefully.
She counted it three times.
The total had to be exactly perfect.
No chance here for mistakes.
Carefully placing the coins back in the jar and twisting on the cap.
She slipped out from the back door and made her way 6 blocks to Rexall's Drug Store with the big red Indian Chief sign above the door.
Amy waited patiently for the pharmacist to give her some attention but he was too intently talking to another man to be bothered by an eight-year-old at this moment.
She twisted her feet to make a scuffing noise.
Nothing.
She cleared her throat with the most disgusting sound she could muster.
No good.
Finally she took a quarter from her jar and banged it on the glass counter.
That did it!
" And what do you want? "
the pharmacist asked in an annoyed tone of voice. "
I'm talking to my brother from Washington whom I haven't seen in ages. "
he said without waiting for a reply to his question.
" Well, I want to talk to you about my brother."
Amy answered back in the same annoyed tone, "He's really, really sick, and I want to buy a miracle. "
" I beg your pardon?"
said the pharmacist.
" His name is Tom and he has something bad growing inside his head and my Daddy says only a miracle can save him now.
So, how much does a miracle cost? "
" We don't sell miracles here, little girl.
I'm sorry but I can't help you. "
The pharmacist said, softening a little.
"Listen, I have the money to pay for it.
If it isn't enough, I will get the rest.
Just tell me how much it costs. "
The pharmacist's brother stooped down and asked the little girl, "What kind of a miracle does your brother need? "
" I don't know. "
Amy replied with her eyes welling up, "I just know he's really sick and Mommy says he needs an operation, but my Daddy can't pay for it, so I want to use my money. "
" How much do you have? "
asked the pharmacist's brother.
" One dollar and eleven cents. "
Amy answered barely audible, "And it's all the money I have, but I can get some more if I need to. "
" Well, what a coincidence," smiled the man. "
A dollar and eleven cents… the exact price of a miracle for little brother. "
Then he said, "Take me to where you live.
I want to see your brother and meet your parents.
Let's see if I have the kind of miracle you need. "
The pharmacist's brother was a surgeon from Washington who specialized in neuro-surgery.
The operation was completed without charge and it wasn't long until Tom was home again and doing well.
Later, Mom and Dad were talking about the chain of events that had led them to this.
Her mom said, "That surgery was a real miracle.
I wonder how much it would have cost?"
Amy smiled.
She knew exactly how much a miracle cost… One dollar and eleven cents… plus the faith of a little child.
We live in an age wherein our daily utterances are often sprinkled with the choicest four-letter words, yet we rarely use the four-letter word everyone longs to hear - LOVE.
And, strangely enough, although everybody is seeking the holy grail of happiness, today we find that people feel insecure more than ever before.
What is the reason for this?
Happiness stems from being loved and wanted, one of the basic psychological needs in each of us that demands fulfillment.
People are willing to go to any lengths to find love.
Nations have gone to war, Kings have abdicated their thrones, and star-crossed lovers have made suicide pacts - all for love.
On the other hand, murders are committed, people exhibit aggression, others withdraw into their shell, and some even take their own lives - all for a lack of love.
The world's first murder was a result of Cain's envy, because he perceived that God loved his brother, Abel, more.
Marilyn Monroe had the world at her feet, with fame and fortune, but overdosed because she did not have the one thing she yearned for more than anything else - to be loved and cherished.
The search for this "sweet mystery of life" even leads young men and women to sell their souls and bodies for what they crave.
They know such love and attention will not endure, yet they let their hearts rule their minds, and their emotions conquer plain logic.
The word "love" may be only four letters long, but it is the most powerful word in the world, because it describes the awesome power residing in every human heart - emotion!
But, it is a double-edged weapon.
It can spur on an individual to do heroic deeds on one hand, as well as cause death and destruction on the other.
Love is, therefore, the engine that drives on people to accomplish the impossible.
But this engine, like any other, requires a certain brand of fuel.
Frequent refueling with the "I LOVE YOU" brand of high octane fuel will keep this engine purring lovingly.
And, the love will be returned in equal measure, because those that are loved find it easy to give love back.
Being loved, and knowing that they are loved, makes people confident, relaxed and happy.
Look around you.
If you see anybody "floating" along with a secret smile on their face and a tune on their lips, you are looking at someone that is loved - and knows it!
Recently, a well-known psychologist was working with a teenage boy who was having serious problems.
As they talked, the boy was asked as to whether his parents loved him.
The teenager looked up sadly and said, "I don't know, but if they do, they've never told me!"
Please don't make the same mistake.
To love without saying so is not enough.
People need to be told that they are loved.
Again, and again, and again!
It is cruel and thoughtless to leave our loved ones in doubt about our affection for them.
It's no use regretting later, when they are no more there to hear you.
If you have a friend worth loving,
Love him.
Yes, and let him know
That you love him, ere life's evening
Tinge his brow with sunset glow.
Why should good words ne'er be said
Of a friend - till he is dead?
Ready or not, some day it will all come to an end.
There will be no more sunrises, no days, no hours or minutes.
All the things you collected, whether treasured or forgotten, will pass to someone else.
Your wealth, fame and temporal power will shrivel to irrelevance.
It will not matter what you owned or what you were owed.
Your grudges, resentments, frustrations, and jealousies will finally disappear.
So, too, your hopes, ambitions, plans, and to-do lists will all expire.
The wins and losses that once seemed so important will fade away.
It won't matter where you came from, or on what side of the tracks you lived.
It won't matter whether you were beautiful or brilliant.
Your gender, skin color, ethnicity will be irrelevant.
So what will matter?
How will the value of your days be measured?
What will matter is not what you bought, but what you built; not what you got, but what you gave.
What will matter is not your success, but your significance.
What will matter is not what you learned, but what you taught.
What will matter is every act of integrity, compassion, courage and sacrifice that enriched, empowered or encouraged others to emulate your example.
What will matter is not your competence, but your character.
What will matter is not how many people you knew, but how many will feel a lasting loss when you're gone.
What will matter is how long you will be remembered, by whom and for what.
Living a life that matters doesn't happen by accident.
It's not a matter of circumstance but of choice.
Choose to live a life that matters.
To realize the value of one year, ask a student who has failed his final exam.
To realize the value of one month, ask a mother who has given birth to a premature baby.
To realize the value of one week, ask an editor of a weekly newspaper.
To realize the value of one day, ask a daily wage laborer who has ten kids to feed.
To realize the value of one hour, ask the lovers who are waiting to meet.
To realize the value of one minute, ask a person who has missed the train.
To realize the value of one second, ask a person who has survived an accident.
To realize the value of one millisecond, ask the person who has won a silver medal in Olympics.
Treasure every moment that you have!
Yesterday is history.
Tomorrow is mystery.
Today is a gift.
That's why it's called "the present".
The lack of opportunity is ever the excuse of a weak, vacillating mind.
Opportunities!
Every life is full of them.
Every lesson in school or college is an opportunity.
Every examination is a chance in life.
Every business transaction is an opportunity: an opportunity to be polite, an opportunity to be manly, an opportunity to be honest, an opportunity to make friends.
Every proof of confidence in you is a great opportunity.
Every responsibility thrust upon your strength and your honor is priceless.
Existence is the privilege of effort, and when that privilege is met like a man, opportunities to succeed along the line of your aptitude will come faster than you can use them.
Young men and women, why do you stand here all the day idle?
Was the land all occupied before you were born?
Has the earth ceased to yield its increase?
Are the seats all taken?
Are the positions all filled?
Are the chances all gone?
Are the resources of your country fully developed?
Are the secrets of nature all mastered?
Is there no way in which you can utilize these passing moments to improve yourself or benefit another?
Don't wait for your opportunity.
Make it - make it as Napoleon made his in a hundred "impossible" situations.
Make it, as all leaders of men, in war and in peace, have made their chances of success.
Make it, as every man must, who would accomplish anything worth the effort.
Golden opportunity is nothing to laziness, but industry makes the commonest chances golden.
I had planned to make brown-sugar pound cake, my specialty, for my Sunday school teacher, Mrs. Lee, who had been in my thoughts.
But suddenly the idea to bake her a cheesecake popped into mind, a lemon cheesecake.
The recipe called for fresh lemons.
I checked my supplies.
No lemons, but plenty of brown sugar.
A pound cake would be so much easier, I thought.
But again came the idea: bake a lemon cheesecake.
After a trip to the grocery for lemons, I began the batter.
I cut a lemon in half, removed the seeds, squeezed the juice into the creamy mixture and stirred.
When I arrived at Mrs. Lee's, her husband let me in. "
She'll be happy to see you," he said.
Then he explained Mrs. Lee had broken her leg and was bedridden. "
The doctor says she'll be fine.
But she's frustrated because she can't get around like she used to. "
I walked into the bedroom, carrying my surprise. "
I'm so sorry about your leg, Mrs. Lee," I said, "Maybe this will make you feel better. "
As I placed the cake on a table, the tangy scent of fresh lemons wafted through the air.
I looked at Mrs. Lee.
She was crying.
" How did you know? "
she asked.
"Know? "
" Today is our wedding anniversary," she said. "
For the past 53 years I've baked my husband his favorite thing. "
She pointed at the cake, "How did you know it was lemon cheesecake? "
Ah, these jasmines, these white jasmines!
I seem to remember the first day when I filled my hands with these jasmines, these white jasmines.
I have loved the sunlight, the sky and the green earth;
I have heard the liquid murmur of the river through the darkness of midnight;
Autumn sunsets have come to me at the bend of a road in the lonely waste, like a bride raising her veil to accept her lover.
Yet my memory is still sweet with the first white jasmines that I held in my hand when I was a child.
Many a glad day has come in my life, and I have laughed with merrymakers on festival nights.
On grey mornings of rain I have crooned many an idle song.
I have worn round my neck the evening wreath of bakulas woven by the hand of love.
Yet my heart is sweet with the memory of the first fresh jasmines that filled my hands when I was a child.
When times become difficult (and you know they sometimes will), remember a moment in your life that was filled with joy and happiness.
Remember how it made you feel happy, and you will have the strength you need to get through any trial.
When life throws you one more obstacle than you think you can handle, remember something you achieved through perseverance and by struggling to the end.
In doing so, you'll find you have the ability to overcome each obstacle brought your way.
When you find yourself drained and depleted of energy, remember to find a place of sanctuary and rest.
Take the necessary time in your own life to dream your dreams and renew your energy, so you'll be ready to face each new day.
When you feel tension, find something fun to do.
You'll find that the stress you feel will dissipate and your thoughts will become clearer.
When you're faced with so many negative and draining situations, realize how minuscule problems will seem when you view your life as a whole - and remember the positive things.
I remember my first Christmas adventure with Grandma.
I was just a kid.
I remember tearing across town on my bike to visit her on the day my big sister dropped the bomb: "There is no Santa Claus," she jeered. "
Even dummies know that! "
My Grandma was not the gushy kind, never had been.
I fled to her that day because I knew she would be straight with me.
I knew Grandma always told the truth, and I knew that the truth always went down a whole lot easier when swallowed with one of her "world-famous" cinnamon buns.
I knew they were world-famous, because Grandma said so.
It had to be true.
Grandma was home, and the buns were still warm.
Between bites, I told her everything.
She was ready for me. "
No Santa Claus? "
she snorted, "Ridiculous!
Don't believe it.
That rumor has been going around for years, and it makes me mad, plain mad.
Now, put on your coat, and let's go. " "
Go?
Go where, Grandma? "
I asked.
I hadn't even finished my second world-famous cinnamon bun.
" Where" turned out to be Claire's General Store, the one store in town that had a little bit of just about everything.
As we walked through its doors, Grandma handed me ten dollars.
That was a bundle in those days. "
Take this money," she said, "and buy something for someone who needs it.
I'll wait for you in the car. "
Then she turned and walked out of Claire's.
I was only eight years old.
I'd often gone shopping with my mother, but never had I shopped for anything all by myself.
The store seemed big and crowded, full of people scrambling to finish their Christmas shopping.
For a few moments I just stood there, confused, clutching that ten-dollar bill, wondering what to buy, and who on earth to buy it for.
I thought of everybody I knew: my family, my friends, my neighbors, the kids at school, the people who went to my church.
I was just about thought out, when I suddenly thought of Mike.
He was a kid with bad breath and messy hair, and he sat right behind me in Mrs. White's grade-two class.
Mike didn't have a coat.
I knew that because he never went out to recess during the winter.
His mother always wrote a note, telling the teacher that he had a cough, but all the kids knew that Mike didn't have a cough; he had no coat.
I fingered the ten-dollar bill with growing excitement.
I would buy Mike a coat!
I settled on a red corduroy one that had a hood to it.
It looked really warm, and he would like that. "
Is this a Christmas present for someone?"
The lady behind the counter asked kindly, as I laid my ten dollars down. "
Yes, ma'am," I replied shyly, "It's for Mike. "
The nice lady smiled at me.
I didn't get any change, but she put the coat in a bag and wished me a Merry Christmas.
That evening, Grandma helped me wrap the coat in Christmas paper and ribbons (a little tag fell out of the coat, and Grandma tucked it in her Bible) and wrote, "To Mike, From Santa Claus" on it.
Grandma said that Santa always insisted on secrecy.
Then she drove me over to Mike's house, explaining as we went that I was now and forever officially one of Santa's helpers.
Grandma parked down the street from Mike's house, and she and I crept noiselessly and hid in the bushes by his front walk.
Then Grandma gave me a nudge. "
All right, Santa Claus," she whispered, "get going. "
I took a deep breath, dashed for his front door, threw the present down on his step, pounded his doorbell and flew back to the safety of the bushes and Grandma.
Together we waited breathlessly in the darkness for the front door to open.
Finally it did, and there stood Mike.
Fifty years haven't dimmed the thrill of those moments spent shivering, beside my Grandma, in Mike's bushes.
That night, I realized that those awful rumors about Santa Claus were just what Grandma said they were: ridiculous.
Santa was alive and well, and we were on his team.
I still have the Bible, with the tag tucked inside: $19.95.
Jane would turn her cell phone off and put it by her photo on the desk every night before going to bed.
This habit had been with her ever since she bought the phone.
Jane had a very close boyfriend, Sim.
When they couldn't meet, they would either call or send messages to each other.
They both liked this type of communication.
One night, Sim really missed Jane.
When he called her, however, Jane's cell phone was off because she was already asleep.
The next day, Sim asked Jane to leave her cell phone on at night because when he needed to find her and could not, he would be worried.
From that day forth, Jane began a new habit.
Her cell phone never shut down at night.
Because she was afraid that she might not be able to hear the phone ring in her sleep, she tried to stay very alert.
As days passed, she became thinner and thinner.
Slowly, a gap began to form between them.
Jane wanted to revive their relationship.
On one night, she called Sim.
However, what she got was a sweet female voice: "Sorry, the subscriber you dialed is power off. "
Jane knew that her love had just been turned off.
After a long time, Jane had a new love, Joe.
No matter how well they got along, Jane refused to get married.
In her heart, she always remembered Sim's words and the night when that phone was power off.
Jane still kept the habit of leaving her cell phone on all through the night, but not expecting it to ring.
One night, Jane caught ill.
In moment of fluster, instead of calling her parents, she dialed Joe's cell phone.
He was already asleep but his cell phone was still on.
Later, Jane asked Joe, "Why don't you turn your cell phone off at night? "
Joe answered: "I'm afraid that if you need anything at night and aren't able to find me, you'll worry. "
Jane finally married Joe.