The secret of heredity
An age-old mystery
What makes us the way we are?
Why do some of us have dark hair and others have light hair?
Why do cats only have kittens and never puppies?
For centuries, no one knew the answers to these questions.
It took many years of inquiry and research to understand how organisms (living things) inherit characteristics from their parents.
Two kinds of study
Two different kinds of study led to this understanding.
One involved breeding plants and animals and noticing how living things pass their characteristics, such as color, size, and shape, to their offspring.
This is called heredity.
Another area of study looked at how organisms are constructed.
Scientists learned that organisms are all made up of tiny “building blocks” called cells.
The very smallest living things, such as bacteria, are made up of just one cell, while large organisms, such as humans, have trillions of cells.
THAT’S A FACT!
Some bacteria are so small that a million can cover the head of a pin.
 Sheep, like other living things, produce offspring like themselves.
The young inherit characteristics from their parents.
In this case, young lambs, like adult sheep, will have four legs, will eat grass, and will have thick, woolly coats.
 This photograph shows bacteria being grown in a laboratory.
Bacteria are single-celled organisms that reproduce by dividing in two.
They reproduce very quickly to make new organisms that are like the original ones.
Eventually, scientists discovered that living things pass on their characteristics through something that is found in living cells.
That “something” is an extraordinary substance called deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA.
A great breakthrough
Discovering DNA and how it works was one of the greatest breakthroughs in science in the last 100 years.
Today, scientists know not only how DNA works but also how to use DNA to give living things characteristics they could never have naturally.
They can make clones - exact copies of organisms.
They are beginning to create life synthetically (from scratch) in a laboratory.
Life needs life
Until as late as the 1800s, many scientists believed that some living things appeared “spontaneously” - that is, without any parents.
For example, food that was left out would “spoil” when tiny germs (we now call them bacteria) appeared in it.
French biologist Louis Pasteur set out to show that even the tiniest life-forms had to come from somewhere.
In a set of experiments, he boiled beef broth to kill any existing germs.
Then he kept the broth in flasks with special filters to keep out any dust or particles.
No germs grew in the broth.
But when he opened the flasks to the air, the broth soon spoiled.
Pasteur showed that bacteria did not appear spontaneously, which confirmed earlier work by 17th-century scientist Francesco Redi. “
I prefer to think that life comes from life, rather than from dust.”
Louis Pasteur
Breakthrough
Louis Pasteur proved that life does not appear spontaneously.
His experiments with bacteria showed that living things are produced only by other living things like themselves.
Heredity in practice
The first farmers
Even in ancient times, people discovered they could influence heredity.
When early humans started to settle in one place, they began to grow the food they needed instead of hunting and foraging for it.
These were the first farmers.
Over many years, they turned wild grasses into cereal crops such as wheat, barley, rice, maize, millet, and sorghum.
They did this in a process called selective breeding.
They collected the seeds from the best plants of one generation of crops to produce the next generation of plants.
Better, tastier vegetables were also produced this way.
Farmers realized that animals could be changed by selective breeding, too.
They bred animals that had characteristics or traits they wanted, such as cattle with more meat and dogs that were easy to train for hunting or herding.
But even though farmers had discovered that they could influence heredity, they did not understand what made this possible.
 These pictures are from ancient Egypt, and date from around 4,000 years ago.
They show us that people had by then already developed grain crops from grasses and bred farm animals from wild ones.
Old beliefs survive
For centuries, people knew from experience that living things produce others like themselves - that a human mother could not, for example, give birth to a rabbit.
Yet not everyone was quite sure whether this was impossible - and they did believe that a mother’s experiences affected the way her young looked.
For example, many people thought that if a baby was born with a cleft palate (a condition that affects the top lip; sometimes called a harelip) the mother must have come into contact with a hare while pregnant.
Similar superstitions still survive all over the world.
THAT’S A FACT!
In 1726, an English woman named Mary Toft claimed to have given birth to rabbits.
Somehow she managed to convince two doctors that it was the result of dreaming about rabbits and craving rabbit meat.
Most doctors were sure this was wrong.
Eventually, she admitted it was all a hoax, done for money.
 About 12,000 years ago, people began to train wild wolves like this one to help with hunting.
Since then, they have used selective breeding to produce the different kinds of dogs we see today.
Breakthrough
People learned from experience that living things produce young like themselves.
They learned to choose the best plants and animals to breed.
Over the years, they developed productive crops from wild plants and farm animals from wild creatures.
How are living things made?
Building blocks
By the 17th century, both farmers and scientists knew they could influence heredity, but no one knew how it worked.
To know how organisms “worked,” scientists needed to find out what organisms are made from and how they are put together.
This important step was made just under 350 years ago by an English scientist named Robert Hooke.
Hooke was born in 1635 and, as a young man, studied many different scientific subjects.
He was a genius at making and using scientific instruments.
One of these instruments was a microscope.
Cells
Hooke examined many different things through his microscope.
In 1665 he published Micrographia, a book about the things he had seen.
It contained one of his most famous drawings: an enlarged section of a piece of cork bark.
The bark was made up of tiny sections that he called “cells,” after the tiny cells that monks slept in. “
It [was] all perforated and porous, much like a honeycomb . . .
these pores, or cells . . .
were indeed the first microscopical pores I ever saw, and perhaps, that were ever seen.”
Robert Hooke, from Micrographia, talking about his observations of cork bark.
 Pictured below are the magnified cells of cork bark, drawn by the scientist Robert Hooke and first published in 1665.
Hooke was the first person to coin the term “cells” for these tiny parts of living things.
What are cells?
We now know that cells are filled with a salty substance called cytoplasm, but they also contain tiny working parts, called “organelles.”
The most important of these organelles is the nucleus, which controls what the cell does.
Most - but not all - of the DNA in a cell is in the nucleus.
In order for an organism to grow, and repair any damage to itself, new cells must grow.
New cells come from the division of old ones.
Cells divide, making two new cells, almost identical to each other.
This is called mitosis.
 Cells reproduce by dividing, over and over again.
Before a cell divides, everything inside it - including its central nucleus - is duplicated.
The cell then gradually splits into two identical new cells.
Animal cells
The wall of a plant cell is fairly thick, so it is easy to see under a microscope.
Animal cells lack cell walls and are instead surrounded by a membrane, which is not as obvious as a wall.
In the 1830s, German scientist Theodor Schwann was one of the first to see animal cells.
In 1839 he and fellow scientist Matthias Jacob Schleiden published their theory that all living things are made of cells.
They went on to find out more about what happens inside a cell.
Breakthrough
Robert Hooke made better microscopes than most of those made previously.
Through them he saw parts of organisms too tiny to see before.
He and others after him discovered that cells make up all living things.
They are among the basic building blocks of life.
Life changes
The story of evolution
Studying living things closely through a microscope is one way of learning about them.
Looking at the way they live and behave is important, too.
Charles Darwin was a naturalist who was interested in all aspects of the different varieties of animals and plants.
In 1831, he embarked on what was to be a momentous journey to South America.
A journey of discovery
The five-year voyage on a British naval ship, the Beagle, eventually took Darwin around the world.
He studied an amazing variety of creatures.
He was particularly interested in those on the Pacific islands of the Galapagos.
His experiences gave him the clues he needed for what was to be a groundbreaking theory.
Darwin began to understand how living things change, or “evolve,” over long periods of time, and how new species come into being.
Back home, Darwin continued his research by studying the way farmers and pigeon breeders used selective breeding to get the kinds of animals they wanted, by choosing characteristics they most valued.
This led Darwin to conclude that selective breeding happened in nature, too.
Variation
The secret lay in what Darwin called “variation.”
Variation describes the natural differences that occur among individuals in a population (group) of the same species, or type.
Charles Darwin
Date of birth: February 12, 1809
Place of birth: Shrewsbury, England
Greatest achievement: Developing the theory of evolution through natural selection.
Interesting fact: He almost didn’t make the voyage on the Beagle - Darwin’s father was not eager to let him go, but an uncle managed to change his father’s mind.
Date of death: April 19, 1882
Darwin suggested that “variations” can occur randomly.
A variation that helps an organism survive in its natural environment will give it a better chance of living longer.
A long life means it can produce plenty of offspring, which will inherit the variation.
Other individuals of the same species may be born with other useful variations, and these, too, will be passed on.
 While visiting the Galapagos Islands, Darwin saw several types of finches, including this large ground finch.
He noted that each had a different type of beak.
Later scientists realized that the shapes of the finches’ beaks had evolved to suit the food available on different islands.
Gradually, those organisms that are not so well adapted will die out, and their place will be taken by the better-adapted ones.
We say the species has evolved by a process called “natural selection.”
Darwin did not know what caused the variations or exactly how they were passed on from one generation to the next.
But, over the next 100 years or so, the more that scientists discovered, the more support their findings gave to Darwin’s theory. “. . .
any variation . . .
if it be . . .
profitable to an individual of any species . . .
will tend to the preservation of that individual and will generally be inherited by its offspring . . . [
which] will thus have a better chance of surviving . . .”
Charles Darwin in On the Origin of Species.
Breakthrough
Darwin’s greatest achievement was working out that evolution happens through the process of “natural selection.”
This theory is accepted to this day by scientists.
A monk in Austria
Inherited “traits”
It was a long time before scientists worked out how heredity - on which Darwin’s theory depends - actually happened.
The first steps came through the work of an Austrian monk named Gregor Mendel.
While tending his monastery garden, he observed the way plants inherited traits from parent plants.
He published his findings in 1866.
However, it was nearly another 35 years before scientists began to understand just how important Mendel’s work had been.
Experiments with peas
One of Mendel’s best-known experiments was with pea plants.
Like many flowers, those of pea plants contain both male and female parts.
The male parts produce pollen.
The female parts, when pollinated, produce seeds (the peas in the pod).
A typical experiment involved crossbreeding pea plants that always produced yellow peas with ones that always produced green peas.
All the offspring produced only yellow peas - no green, or green-yellow ones.
They seemed to have inherited only yellowness.
Mendel planted these yellow peas, which grew into plants and produced flowers.
He “self-pollinated” these (fertilized them with their own pollen).
Amazingly, only three out of four of the resulting pea plants produced yellow peas.
Roughly one plant in four produced green peas, though it had no “green” parents.
It was as if the instruction to produce green peas had been hiding somewhere in the parent plant.
 This albino (white) deer lacks normal coloring because it has inherited the recessive gene for this trait from both its parents.
Its parents were probably brown, but they both passed on the albino-causing gene.
If only one parent had the recessive gene, the deer would have been brown.
Conclusions
Mendel concluded that living things inherit traits (such as color) from their parents, and that: 1.
Traits are passed from one generation to another and are carried by “factors” which we now call “genes.”
2.
We now know that individuals inherit one gene for each trait from each parent.
A pea plant with one green parent and one yellow parent inherits one green and one yellow gene.
3.
A trait can be passed on without showing up.
Today, we know this is because genes can be “dominant” or “recessive.”
The recessive green pea gene only shows up when a plant inherits it from both parents, and there is no dominant yellow gene to “hide” it.
Breakthrough
Gregor Mendel discovered that certain traits are only seen if they are inherited from both parents.
This led later scientists to understand how some genes (which carry the traits) are “dominant” and some “recessive.”
Finding DNA and chromosomes
Clues to the mystery
The story of making sense of heredity is like finding clues to a mystery.
Mendel’s work was one clue.
The next was the discovery of DNA, in 1869, by Swiss chemist Johann Friedrich Miescher.
After that came the discovery of chromosomes.
Inside cells
Miescher’s research focused on the inside of cells.
Rather gruesomely, he used pus and blood cells squeezed from bandages taken from a hospital.
Later, he experimented with salmon sperm cells.
He separated out the nucleus from the rest of the cell and did tests to find out what it was made of.
Miescher found the nucleus contained protein and another substance.
This other substance was slightly acidic, so he called it nucleic acid.
We now call it DNA.
Miescher did not know it, but DNA is the substance that genes are made of.
The discovery of chromosomes
Scientists already knew that, for living things to grow and repair themselves, their cells must divide to make new cells.
In 1882, German scientist Walther Flemming noticed tiny threadlike structures in cells that were about to divide.
These threads were what we now call chromosomes.
Each chromosome is one enormously long DNA “string,” coiled up tightly around special proteins.
Before a cell divides, it duplicates all its chromosomes, so that each new cell gets a complete set.
THAT’S A FACT!
DNA molecules are like strings.
If all the strings of DNA in a single cell were uncoiled and placed end to end, they would be more than 6.6 feet (2 m) long.
Johann Friedrich Miescher
Date of birth: August 13, 1844
Place of birth: Basel, Switzerland
Greatest achievement: The discovery of DNA.
Interesting fact: Miescher wanted to be a doctor, but he was slightly deaf, so he decided to concentrate on science instead.
Date of death: August 26, 1895
Chromosomes
All living things have chromosomes.
Different living things have different numbers of them.
Rice, for example, has 24, but fruit flies have just eight.
Each chromosome is a single, enormously long DNA molecule.
Along its length are many different genes.
 There are 23 pairs of chromosomes in almost every human cell.
These are a woman’s chromosomes, with two X chromosomes.
In a man, the chromosomes in the 23rd pair would be one X and one much smaller Y chromosome.
Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes (46 in total).
In most pairs, the chromosomes are always the same size, but one pair is different.
In a female, the two chromosomes in this pair - called X chromosomes - are alike.
However, in males the pair do not match; there is one X chromosome and one, much smaller, Y chromosome.
In humans, and other life-forms that reproduce sexually, both the male sex cells (sperm or pollen) and the female sex cells (eggs) contain only one chromosome from each pair.
When the sex cells combine to start a new life, the single chromosomes form pairs, with one chromosome from each parent.
 Before a cell divides, all the chromosomes inside it duplicate.
That means that there is a full set of chromosomes in each new cell.
Breakthrough
Friedrich Miescher discovered DNA, though it was left to later scientists to learn the importance of this.
Walther Flemming learned how chromosomes behave.
Professor Morgan’s fruit flies
A smelly laboratory
So far, scientists knew what chromosomes looked like.
But what did they do?
The answer came in a smelly laboratory, filled with overripe fruit, which attracted tiny fruit flies.
The laboratory was set up in 1911, at Columbia University, New York, by Professor Thomas Hunt Morgan.
Morgan studied mutations in the flies - which we now know are caused by changes to one small part of a living thing’s DNA.
Morgan used fruit flies because they reproduce quickly.
By this time, Mendel’s work had been rediscovered.
Scientists began using the word “gene” for Mendel’s “factors,” but they had not yet connected genes with DNA.
Looking at the eyes
One mutation that Morgan’s team found was that some flies had white eyes instead of the normal red.
Also, when a white-eyed fly mated with a red-eyed one, all the offspring had red eyes, although white eyes could then appear in the next generation.
 A magnified picture of two fruit flies, of the kind Professor Morgan studied.
The white eyes were one of the first mutations that Morgan noticed; most fruit flies have red eyes.
Thomas Hunt Morgan
Date of birth: September 25, 1866
Place of birth: Lexington, Kentucky.
Greatest achievement: His work on chromosomes and heredity.
Interesting fact: His laboratory was messy, and he often left notes to his colleagues on scraps of paper covered with squashed flies.
Date of death: December 4, 1945
A link to chromosomes
Morgan noticed that the unusual white eyes normally showed up only among males.
Why did males inherit these eyes, and not females?
He knew that what made males and females different from each other was having slightly different chromosomes.
So, he concluded, heredity (and genes) must be something to do with chromosomes.
It was the first proof that heredity is linked to chromosomes.
Some scientists had already suggested this, but Morgan had not believed it at first.
Morgan and, later, other scientists went on to find and breed from other mutant fruit flies - such as flies with differently colored bodies or differently sized wings.
From these, they studied combined mutations (flies with more than one mutation).
Inheritance gets complicated
Studies of heredity done at this time revealed just how complicated it could be.
The simple rules that Mendel had discovered did not always work.
For example, snapdragon plants with red and white flowers can crossbreed to produce pink offspring.
This is what is called “incomplete dominance,” because the red gene only partly dominates.
 A bed of red, white, and pink snapdragons.
The genes passed between generations of the red and white flowers have become mixed to produce plants whose flowers are pink - a mix of white and red.
Breakthrough
Morgan finally proved that genes are carried on chromosomes and that they are the basic mechanism for passing on characteristics from generation to generation.
At last . . .
the truth about DNA
Working with bacteria
During the 1920s, scientists started using bacteria to study genes.
Because bacteria are single-celled organisms, they reproduce even faster than fruit flies, and in even larger numbers.
As the story of DNA unfolded, bacteria began to play a large part in finding out more about heredity and how it happens. “
The transforming factor”
In the 1920s, British scientist Fred Griffith worked with a type of bacteria that had two forms.
One was harmless, while the other caused pneumonia in mice.
He found he could move material from the harmful kind into the harmless one, transforming it so that it became harmful, too.
He realized that the material he had moved must contain a “transforming factor.”
The transformed bacteria went on to reproduce as harmful bacteria, too - meaning the “factor” could be inherited.
Extra DNA
Most DNA lies in the chromosomes, within the nucleus of a cell.
But there is also DNA outside the nucleus, in tiny organelles (working parts) called mitochondria.
These use the nutrients from food to make the energy that cells need to reproduce and work.
This DNA is called “mitochondrial DNA.”
THAT’S A FACT!
We have more bacteria living on and in our bodies than we have cells.
There are bad bacteria and good bacteria.
Bad bacteria cause illness, but good bacteria help us to digest the food we eat.
They busily break down our food, so we can use the healthy nutrients and then make waste from the rest.
Finding the factor
In the 1940s, Canadian Oswald Avery did more experiments with pneumonia bacteria to try to find the transforming factor.
In one experiment, he destroyed all the protein in the harmful bacteria.
He found that they could still transform harmless bacteria.
But when he used bacteria in which he had destroyed all the DNA, he found that they no longer turned harmless bacteria into harmful ones. “. . .
most people didn’t take [Avery] seriously.
Because you could always argue that his observations were limited to bacteria . . .”
James Watson (see page 24) explaining the reason why Avery didn’t win the Nobel Prize at the time of his discovery.
 This is an image of the type of bacteria that causes acne, magnified almost 28,000 times.
As single-celled organisms, bacteria reproduce by dividing, which they can do very fast.
You can see the bacterium on the right is in the process of dividing into two cells.
He had shown that DNA was the genetic material - it carries the information that cells pass on to their descendants.
Breakthrough
Oswald Avery discovered that it is DNA that carries genetic information.
This is passed on into new cells as organisms grow, reproduce, and repair themselves.
How DNA is made
Finding out more
Now that scientists understood what DNA did, they began to find out more about it.
They discovered what it is made from, what shape its molecules are, and finally, how it actually works.
Nitrogenous bases
Back in the 1920s, the Russian-born American scientist, Phoebus Levene had discovered that each molecule of DNA contains four nitrogenous bases (chemical units containing nitrogen).
These are adenine (usually shortened to “A”), thymine (T), guanine (G), and cytosine (C).
He also found that DNA contains sugar and a phosphate (material containing phosphorous).
In 1949, Austrian-born biochemist Erwin Chargaff continued Levene’s work by studying the DNA in a range of different organisms, from simple bacteria to cattle.
He discovered that, in every case, there was almost as much A as T and, similarly, almost the same amount of G as C. This suggested links between A and T, and G and C. But what these links were, remained to be discovered.
 Erwin Chargaff tested the DNA in calves and a number of other living things.
He found that the proportions of the bases adenine and thymine were about the same, as were those of guanine and cytosine.
The clue to the shape
In 1953, the American biochemist Linus Pauling suggested that DNA was the shape of a triple spiral, with the phosphates on the inside and the bases on the outside.
Little did he know, but a young English chemist named Rosalind Franklin, at King’s College in London, was already on the way to proving him wrong.
In 1952, she was working with X-ray crystallography (using X-rays to determine the shapes of molecules in crystals).
She and a student produced many photographs of DNA molecules, one of which has since become world famous.
Although she did not immediately see it herself, it showed that DNA does indeed have a spiral shape, but it is very different from the one Pauling suggested.
Rosalind Elsie Franklin
Date of birth: July 25, 1920
Place of birth: London, England
Greatest achievement: Supervising research that produced a photograph that gave clues to the structure of DNA.
Interesting fact: After leaving college, she held a research post where her work became important in the development of carbon-fiber technology.
Date of death: April 16, 1958
Breakthrough
The work of Phoebus Levene and Erwin Chargaff determined that DNA molecules contain nitrogenous bases: A, T, G, and C, and that there are equal amounts of A and T, and of G and C. But it was a photograph taken by a student of Rosalind Franklin’s that gave the vital clue to discovering the shape and structure of DNA.
Double twist
The photograph
In the early 1950s, scientists Francis Crick and James Watson were working at a laboratory in Cambridge, England.
They wanted to find the structure of DNA.
Their friend Maurice Wilkins showed them the photograph taken by Raymond Gosling, a student then supervised by Rosalind Franklin.
This provided Crick and Watson with the breakthrough they needed.
Putting the evidence together
Crucial clues in the photograph helped Crick and Watson to figure out that the DNA molecule is a “double helix” - a spiral with two strands, like a twisted ladder.
The sides of the “ladder” are made up of groups of sugars and phosphates.
The bases (A, T, C, and G) stick out from the sides of the ladder at regular intervals.
When bases from each side meet, they join, forming the ladder’s “rungs.”
Bases can only pair in specific ways: A always pairs with T, and G pairs with C.
Reproducing DNA
It became clear that, before a cell divides, each DNA molecule copies itself, so that each new cell will have a full DNA “set.”
How does this happen?
First, the two DNA strands “unzip” from each other.
Then a matching chain forms on each of the separated strands.
The result is two new double-stranded molecules.
James Dewey Watson
Date of birth: April 6, 1928
Place of birth: Chicago, Illinois
Greatest achievement: With Francis Crick and Maurice Wilkins, he worked out the structure of DNA and how it reproduces.
Interesting fact: As a boy, Watson loved bird-watching, which led him to study zoology and then genetics.
 Watson (left) and Francis Crick with their model of DNA.
 This diagram shows the “double helix” shape of the DNA molecule.
It is like a twisted ladder.
Some rungs are made from the bases adenine (A) and thymine (T); others are made from guanine (G) and cytosine (C). “
We have found the secret of life.”
Francis Crick and James Watson’s announcement when they went to The Eagle pub in Cambridge, England, to celebrate the fact that they had worked out the structure of DNA.
Finding out that DNA could copy itself was an important discovery.
It showed how DNA and the genetic information it carries can pass into new cells.
This includes the sex cells that parents produce to make offspring.
Because offspring inherit their parents’ DNA, they are like them.
Crick and Watson, along with Maurice Wilkins, were awarded the 1962 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine “for their discoveries concerning the molecular structure of nucleic acids and its significance for information transfer in living material.”
It is often suggested that Rosalind Franklin should have shared the prize for her work on DNA.
But she died in 1958, and Nobel Prizes are only given to living people.
Breakthrough
Crick and Watson discovered the structure of DNA.
From this they worked out how it is passed on as cells divide and form new cells.
They had solved the age-old mystery of heredity, and this paved the way for huge scientific and medical advances.
The messenger and the code
Coded messages
The next question scientists needed to answer was, how does DNA pass on information to the cells, so that they know what to do?
Crick and his colleagues found that the order of bases along the DNA molecule is a code.
This code is used to give the cell instructions for making proteins.
Proteins are the substances that do all of the important work in cells.
DNA makes RNA makes proteins
DNA does not give its coded instructions directly to the cell.
Instead, it passes them on through another nucleic acid, called ribonucleic acid (RNA).
This allows the DNA to remain in the cell nucleus, safe from damage.
Sections of the DNA molecule are copied to RNA, which then becomes mRNA (messenger RNA).
This carries the DNA “message” out of the nucleus.
In the cytoplasm, mRNA is “translated” into proteins.
This happens on tiny, rounded organelles called ribosomes.
The importance of proteins
Proteins do most of the really important jobs in living cells.
Many parts of the cell are made from proteins.
Proteins also control the thousands of chemical reactions that happen inside cells.
Each kind of protein is made from a long string of subunits, called amino acids.
The amino acids have to be in exactly the right order along the protein chain.
If not, the protein cannot do its job.
Francis Harry Compton Crick
Date of birth: June 8, 1916
Place of birth: Northampton, England
Greatest achievements: Understanding how DNA is constructed, how it carries information, and the role of RNA.
Interesting fact: During World War II, Francis Crick worked developing radar and magnetic mines for naval warfare.
Date of death: July 28, 2004
The genetic code
DNA and RNA molecules are made up of just four different bases.
However, there are 20 different amino acids.
So, how could a four-letter “alphabet” produce a code for 20 different amino acids?
This was a huge puzzle to scientists for many years.
The answer is that each amino acid is coded by a “word” made up of three bases.
For example, suppose the first three bases on a piece of mRNA are AGG.
In genetic code, this is an amino acid called arginine.
So when a ribosome reads the bases AGG on the mRNA, it attaches arginine to the protein chain.
Each triplet of bases on the RNA is translated into an animo acid, so that the protein chain is built in the right order.
 The bases that line a strand of DNA form a kind of code.
Each group of three bases gives instructions for making one amino acid.
THAT’S A FACT!
RNA usually carries information out of the nucleus, but retroviruses, such as HIV (which causes AIDS), reverse this, with RNA carrying messages back into DNA, altering its makeup.
Breakthrough
Scientists discovered that an organism’s DNA contains coded messages about how it should grow and reproduce and that RNA carries those messages out of the nucleus.
Understanding this raised an interesting scientific question - could an organism’s DNA be changed artificially?
Changes and mistakes in DNA
Mutation
Scientists have learned more about how DNA behaves.
One important thing they have found is that changes in the DNA can happen during the life of living things (including humans).
Changes - or mutations - in the DNA inside a cell can happen for several reasons.
Sometimes they take place when a cell’s DNA is being copied as our body cells divide.
This can cause all or part of a gene to “jump” to a different position on a chromosome.
Occasionally the DNA is changed when it is affected by radiation, chemicals, or viruses.
Changes like these happen throughout our lives.
Switching on DNA
In most of the different kinds of cells that make up an organism, only parts of the DNA are active, or “switched on.”
Various parts of DNA are also switched on at different stages in our lives.
For example, some genes are switched on in the body during puberty (the time when children start to mature into adults).
Sometimes a mutation can happen in DNA that is “switched off.”
If this DNA is later switched on, the mutation is switched on, too.
 This piglet was born after the 1986 accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the Ukraine released huge amounts of radiation.
This damaged the DNA among people and animals in the region, causing cancers and other illnesses.
Damage to the DNA in animals’ sex cells meant they often gave birth to deformed young.
Effects of mutations
Most mutations in DNA are harmless.
Some can cause damage to a few cells, but have no long-term, serious effects.
Mutations in the DNA of sex cells (sperms and eggs) of adult animals show up in the young that form when the cells combine to make a new life.
Some mutations in sex cells are harmful and result in the young having genetic disorders that mean they cannot survive or will spend their lives with an illness.
Very occasionally, the mutation is beneficial (helpful or useful).
This is the kind of change that can help evolution happen.
Testing, testing
People can now have tests to discover if they have faulty DNA that their children may inherit.
For example, there is now a test for the gene that causes cystic fibrosis, a disease that affects the lungs and digestion, and can shorten life.
Finding out that they have faulty genes means parents can make informed decisions.
Also, in some cases, developing embryos can be tested for disease. “
Every inherited disease is due to mutation.”
Steve Jones, professor of genetics at University College, London, in his book The Language of the Genes (2000).
 Tsar Nicholas II of Russia with his family, including his young son, Alexei, who was born with hemophilia.
Hemophilia is a disease that affects the way the blood clots, making any cut or bruise dangerous.
This genetic disorder appeared in the 19th century in Queen Victoria’s family and spread to the Russian royal family when her granddaughter married Tsar Nicholas II.
Breakthrough
Scientists have found that our DNA can mutate or change.
Some mutations can be passed on from parents to children.
Scientists can now test unborn children and prospective parents for inherited mutations that are harmful and damage DNA.
Genetic modification
First steps
From the 1960s onward, scientists learned to take pieces of DNA from one organism and put them into another.
By doing this, they created living things with completely new characteristics - bacteria that can make medicines, for example.
This is called “genetic modification,” or GM.
Step 1
In the late 1950s, Arthur Kornberg, who was later at Stanford University, California, was working with DNA molecules from viruses and bacteria.
He discovered an enzyme (a kind of protein) that can make copies of DNA segments.
Other scientists discovered enzymes that could join together pieces of DNA.
Step 2
In the 1960s, Swiss scientist Werner Arber made another key discovery.
He found that some enzymes from bacteria acted like “biological scissors.”
They could be used to cut long DNA molecules into shorter sections. “
Some geniuses at Stanford University have created life in the test tube!”
President Lyndon B. Johnson, referring to the work of Kornberg and others, in an address to the Smithsonian Institution, December 14, 1967.
Kornberg denied that this is what he had done.
Step 3
Finally, in the 1970s, the three techniques of copying, cutting, and joining were brought together by a team led by Professor Stanley Cohen.
Cohen’s team worked with short, circular DNA molecules called “plasmids.”
Plasmids are found in many bacteria.
They are separate from the bacteria’s main DNA.
In nature, plasmids give bacteria “add-on” abilities, such as immunity to a virus or the ability to “eat” new types of food.
Cohen and his colleagues cut out a short section of DNA from a toad and then made many copies of it.
They “pasted” the toad DNA into plasmids.
When the genetically modified plasmids were mixed into a “culture” (growing colony) of bacteria, some of the bacteria took up the plasmids containing toad DNA.
The GM plasmids became part of the bacteria.
 This is a magnified image of a bacterium that has been treated to weaken its cell membrane, causing its DNA to be ejected.
The photo shows some small loops of DNA, which are probably plasmids. “
New” DNA made this way is known as “recombinant DNA” - DNA that has been “recombined.”
Breakthrough
Scientists learned to cut out sections of DNA, copy them, and paste them into other organisms.
This technique of genetic modification later proved useful in fields such as medical research.
GM plants
Moving on from bacteria
Teams of scientists all over the world have been working on GM plants for years.
As with bacteria, it means bringing DNA from other organisms into plants.
However, there are differences between making GM bacteria and GM plants.
Why modify?
GM bacteria are mostly used to produce medicines.
Plants are usually genetically modified for other reasons.
Some GM crops are resistant to drought or to a particular disease.
Some contain toxins (poisons) that kill insect pests.
Other GM crops are resistant to pesticides and weed killers, so that farmers can spray their fields without damaging their crops.
How is it done?
New DNA can be introduced into plant cells in several ways.
One method is to use bacteria that infect some plants.
These bacteria act by injecting their DNA into plant cells.
Scientists insert a section of DNA into the bacteria, which then inject it into a plant’s cells.
Another way to insert modified genes is to use a device called a “gene gun.”
This fires tiny particles of gold or other metal into plant cells.
These metal particles are coated with new DNA.
 Plants can be grown from single cells.
Here, the plants being grown this way have been genetically modified.
They will pass this modification on in their seeds, which will be used to grow crops of GM plants.
Opposition
Many people oppose GM crops.
They fear that GM plants may crossbreed with weeds, producing hard-to-kill “superweeds.”
As a result, farmers would have to use extra chemicals to keep their fields clear.
This could be a threat to wildlife and possibly whole ecosystems.
People worry, too, that eating GM crops could be harmful, either because they are “unnatural” or because of the chemicals used on them. “
Genetically modified food and crops . . . [
pose] a serious threat to biodiversity and our own health.”
The environmental pressure group Greenpeace
Also, GM crops grown by farmers often have infertile seeds.
Farmers cannot use them to plant new crops the next year.
They must buy expensive new seeds, instead.
This is very unpopular, especially in the developing world.
 GM crops that are resistant to herbicides can be regularly sprayed without damaging them.
However, this brings with it the danger of large amounts of harmful chemicals passing into the human food chain.
Pharming
Some scientists hope to genetically modify plants and animals to produce medicines.
Using plants and animals in this way has been nicknamed “Pharming.”
Although this has been shown to work, some people are opposed to it.
They fear that plants modified to produce drugs could escape into the environment.
They could contaminate other plants and the soil with harmful substances.
Breakthrough
Scientists have learned to make GM plants.
Farmers can grow these as crops in the hope of increasing production and making more profit.
This is still controversial.
GM animals
Modifying animals
Making genetically modified animals is a lot more complicated than making GM plants - but it can be done.
These animals are described as being “transgenic.”
They are made by injecting “new” DNA (from another organism) into the fertilized egg of one animal and then placing the egg in the body of another - or even the same - female animal.
The young she gives birth to will contain the new DNA.
Transgenic mice
The first transgenic animals were mice, developed in 1974, by Rudolf Jaenisch and Beatrice Mintz.
They introduced a gene into the mice that led their offspring to develop the blood cancer leukemia.
Most transgenic animals produced since then have also been mice.
The genes of mice and humans are very similar, so mice are likely to be affected by genetic changes in similar ways to humans.
They also have the advantage of being able to reproduce very quickly.
However, there have been many other kinds of transgenic animals, ranging from insects to monkeys.
 These mice contain a gene from a jellyfish, which makes them luminous under some kinds of light.
This “luminous” gene was introduced to help scientists keep track of other, more useful introduced genes.
THAT’S A FACT!
Some transgenic mice are luminous.
Scientists need to track any new gene that is introduced into an animal, to find out if it is active.
To do this, they sometimes link the gene to another that has a visible effect - for example, a jellyfish gene that will make the animal glow in the dark.
As well as mice, there have also been luminous pigs, rabbits, and kittens.
Why change an animal’s DNA?
Transgenic animals are generally used for research.
For example, researchers might make a transgenic mouse containing a human gene that they want to study.
Transgenic mice can also be used to test new drugs or to try to find the genes that cause human genetic disorders.
Other animals can also be used.
Scientists have found that a protein made in the bodies of animals called sea cucumbers makes them resistant to parasites.
They have used DNA from sea cucumbers to genetically modify the type of mosquito that carries parasites that cause the deadly disease malaria.
Scientists hope to create malaria-resistant GM mosquitoes, which will crossbreed with wild mosquitoes, making them resistant to malaria parasites, too.
This could save millions of human lives.
 In the tropics, mosquitoes similar to this one spread the deadly disease malaria.
GM techniques used on the mosquitoes could help prevent this.
Breakthrough
Scientists created GM animals containing DNA from other living things, mainly for medical research.
Clones and cloning
Clones and cloning
Clones are individuals that have exactly the same DNA as each other.
They occur naturally in bacteria when they divide, and when new plants are grown from the cuttings of other plants.
Identical twins are almost clones - they develop from a single egg cell, with nearly identical DNA.
Artificial cloning
Scientists have found ways to make clones artificially.
The first clones were made by splitting embryos at a very early stage, to make them produce two identical young.
More recently, clones have been made by taking an egg cell from one animal, removing its nucleus and replacing this with the nucleus of a normal body cell from a second animal.
The artificial cell can then develop into a clone of the second animal.
THAT’S A FACT!
Nine-banded armadillos always give birth to about four genetically identical young.
They are the only mammal that does this.
Dolly the sheep
The first mammal to be cloned in this way was a sheep named Dolly, born in 1996.
Dolly was the clone of a sheep called a Finn Dorset.
The nucleus of one of this sheep’s cells was injected into an egg cell from another sheep.
The artificial egg cell grew, was implanted in a third sheep, and was born like a normal lamb.
Since Dolly, this technique has been used to clone other animals, including cattle, cats, dogs, and monkeys.
The puppy in this picture is a clone of her mother - also shown.
She has exactly the same DNA as her mother, rather than a mix of a mother’s and father’s DNA.
Cloning stem cells
Another kind of cloning could become very important in medicine.
This is a technique for cloning stem cells.
Many kinds of cell, such as nerve or muscle cells, cannot divide once they are formed.
These are called adult cells.
However, the tissues of the body need to be able to grow and repair themselves.
So each kind of tissue contains groups of special cells known as stem cells.
These cells keep their ability to divide and develop.
In adult animals, stem cells can develop into only a few different kinds of cell.
But very early in life, when an embryo is just a ball of cells, it contains stem cells that can turn into any kind of body cell.
Scientists are very interested in these embryonic stem cells.
If they could be cloned, they could be used to repair damaged body tissue, or even grow new body organs.
 The nucleus of a specially-treated adult cell from a sheep was fused with an “empty” egg.
This egg was implanted into another sheep.
It developed into Dolly - a clone of the original animal.
Embryonic stem cells usually come from embryos left over after people have had fertility treatment.
Some people object to the use of embryos for research, saying it is destroying a life.
Breakthrough
Scientists discovered that they could genetically modify cells to produce animal clones.
This led to Dolly the sheep - the first mammalian clone made from an adult cell.
The ultimate map
Mapping pioneer
Work on DNA during the twentieth century was not confined to modifying, or changing it.
Researchers also worked on finding out how the code is set out in unmodified organisms - including in humans.
This is called “mapping genomes.” (
An organism’s genome is its entire set of genes.)
THAT’S A FACT!
The complete DNA instruction book, or genome, for a human contains about 3 billion bases and about 20,000 to 25,000 genes on 23 pairs of chromosomes.
 The DNA of all living things is very similar and made up of the same chemicals.
For example, human DNA is more similar to than different from plant DNA!
The pioneer in this was the British scientist Frederick Sanger.
In the 1960s and 1970s, he developed a way of “sequencing” or “mapping” DNA using dyes or radioactivity to mark each base.
This was a simpler method than anything used before.
Starting small and moving on
In the 1980s, scientists used Sanger’s system as they started work on finding the order in which the billions of bases in the human genome are set out.
This process is called “sequencing the human genome.”
The project started by mapping simpler genomes, such as those of yeasts, fruit flies, and worms.
Then work started on the genome of one individual human being.
The project was painstakingly slow at first.
However, improved techniques and powerful computers eventually made sequencing much faster.
The work involved many universities and scientists in research centers in six countries.
It was largely paid for by governments and charitable organizations.
Frederick Sanger
Date of birth: August 13, 1918
Place of birth: Rendcombe, England
Greatest achievement: Discovering a method for sequencing DNA.
Interesting fact: He won the 1958 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for work on the hormone insulin.
Date of death: November 19, 2013
Each team worked on a different part of the genome.
Work was eventually completed in 2003.
Methods have now improved so much that a person’s genome can be mapped in days.
Scientists are still looking for ways to use the information that mapping makes available.
Who owns the genome?
The final stages of mapping the human genome were controversial.
A private firm, the U.S.-based Celera Genomics, entered the race and intended to sell its findings to scientists in order to make money.
Scientists working in centers that were publicly or charitably funded were opposed to this - and eventually won the argument. “
People have to take democratic responsibility for the human genome.
It’s not something that can be left to the commercial manufacturers, like making motor cars.”
Professor Sir John Sulston of the Sanger Institute, Cambridge, England.
Breakthrough
The discovery of how to map the entire genome of every living thing, including that of humans, could lead to huge advances in medicine.
Fingerprints and profiles
A tiny difference
Everyone’s DNA is 99.9 percent identical to that of everybody else.
Yet that 0.1 percent difference makes each one of us unique.
This is something that can be useful in many ways, including criminal investigation.
DNA “fingerprints”
In 1984, Sir Alec Jeffreys, a professor at Leicester University, England, discovered how to make clear the differences in people’s DNA.
He did this by copying strands of DNA until there was a big enough sample for testing.
This was originally called DNA “fingerprinting” because our fingerprints, too, are unique.
It is now also called DNA profiling.
Using the “fingerprints”
DNA evidence was first used in 1985, to help a young man from Ghana, who the British authorities claimed was an illegal immigrant.
The man said he belonged to a family who had the right to live in Britain, and his DNA proved he was telling the truth.
 A technician at the FBI National Laboratory in Boston, Massachusetts, studies a DNA profile printout.
DNA from traces of hair or skin at crime scenes can be used as evidence.
In 1987, DNA was used to convict a man named Colin Pitchfork of two murders.
DNA evidence has since been used to convict many criminals.
It can also be used to identify victims and even to prove that someone accused of a crime is innocent.
In 1993, DNA evidence was used to get a pardon for an innocent man named Kirk Bloodsworth who was awaiting the death penalty in the United States.
DNA evidence can also show whether or not a man is the father of a child, and it can help people trace where their ancestors came from. “
My life changed on Monday morning at [9:05 A.M., September 10, 1984] . . .
I realized we had genetic fingerprinting.”
Sir Alec Jeffreys
Controversial
In Britain, the police hold databases of DNA samples from about six percent of the population, including innocent people.
That figure totals about one percent in the United States, and 0.3 percent in most European countries.
The British police say DNA databases help them fight crime.
However, human rights activists say they are an attack on privacy and could fall into the hands of organizations that will use the information commercially.
For example, health insurance companies could use the data to figure out how likely someone is to develop a disease or to die young.
They also worry that these databases give the police too much power.
 Police may now take mouth swabs, as well as fingerprints, from possible suspects, after a crime has been committed.
Both are analyzed to see if they match evidence found at the crime scene.
Breakthrough
In 1984, Sir Alec Jeffreys found a way to identify individual people’s DNA.
This is called DNA profiling, and it has become hugely important in fighting crime.
What next?
Using DNA
Working with and adapting DNA has already helped scientists produce better medicines and new kinds of crops.
In the future, scientists will probably find many other ways to use DNA.
Gene therapy
One promising use of modified DNA is for “gene therapy.”
The idea is to replace faulty DNA with working DNA in people with genetic illnesses.
Researchers are also looking into ways to switch off sections of DNA and stop faults from showing up.
Gene therapy is not yet safe or reliable enough for routine use in humans.
One day, it may help people with all kinds of genetic conditions, including some forms of cancer and possibly AIDS.
Another possibility is “germline gene therapy.”
This means replacing faulty DNA right at the start of life, just as an egg is fertilized.
When the egg grows into a baby, he or she will not have the genetic illness, and will not pass it on to the next generation.
However, no one knows if germline therapy would work, or what the long-term effects might be.
The research is also controversial because it would involve using stem cells from embryos.
Tailor-made medicines
As we understand how everyone’s DNA differs, it may become possible to develop medicines that are “tailor-made” to individual needs.
This would be useful because different people react differently to certain medicines - and sometimes experience nasty side effects.
Xenotransplantation
Scientists are also looking into using GM animal organs for human transplants.
This is called “xenotransplantation.”
It could be very useful.
Finding organs for transplant is difficult, as it often relies on a suitable donor dying and the person in need being ready immediately.
Modified pig organs have already been used in emergencies, to keep a patient alive while a human organ is found.
However, the problem of the body rejecting a transplanted organ is even greater with xenotransplantation than when using human organs.
 This GM pig in Korea was bred as part of a program to produce animals whose organs can be used in transplant surgery.
Transplants now only work if the organs come from another human - and then not always.
GM animals may one day provide an alternative source of organs.
Nature and nurture
Scientists are also investigating how DNA affects behavior.
It seems, for example, that there may be a genetic reason why some people more easily become addicted to drugs and alcohol than others.
So can we always say it’s entirely their own fault if alcoholics drink and drug addicts take drugs?
And, if it turns out that some kinds of criminal behavior are inherited, should this affect the way we treat the criminals?
And, lastly . . .
The more we find out about DNA, the more uses we can find for the information gained.
Some potential uses are exciting and some are highly controversial, but most people agree that all future discoveries should be used for the good of all humanity.
Whatever happens, one thing is certain - there will be many more breakthroughs in the remarkable story of DNA.