Monday, 17th.
TO-DAY is the first day of school.
These three months of vacation in the country have passed like a dream.
This morning my mother conducted me to the Baretti schoolhouse to have me enter for the third elementary course: I was thinking of the country and went unwillingly.
All the streets were swarming with boys: the two book-shops were thronged with fathers and mothers who were purchasing bags, portfolios, and copy-books, and in front of the school so many people had collected, that the beadle and the policeman found it difficult to keep the entrance disencumbered.
Near the door, I felt myself touched on the shoulder: it was my master of the second class, cheerful, as usual, and with his red hair ruffled, and he said to me:-
"So we are separated forever, Enrico?"
I knew it perfectly well, yet these words pained me.
We made our way in with difficulty.
Ladies, gentlemen, women of the people, workmen, officials, nuns, servants, all leading boys with one hand, and holding the promotion books in the other, filled the anteroom and the stairs, making such a buzzing, that it seemed as though one were entering a theatre.
I beheld again with pleasure that large room on the ground floor, with the doors leading to the seven classes, where I had passed nearly every day for three years.
There was a throng; the teachers were going and coming.
My schoolmistress of the first upper class greeted me from the door of the class-room, and said:-
"Enrico, you are going to the floor above this year.
I shall never see you pass by any more!"
and she gazed sadly at me.
The director was surrounded by women in distress because there was no room for their sons, and it struck me that his beard was a little whiter than it had been last year.
I found the boys had grown taller and stouter.
On the ground floor, where the divisions had already been made, there were little children of the first and lowest section, who did not want to enter the class-rooms, and who resisted like donkeys: it was necessary to drag them in by force, and some escaped from the benches; others, when they saw their parents depart, began to cry, and the parents had to go back and comfort and reprimand them, and the teachers were in despair.
My little brother was placed in the class of Mistress Delcati: I was put with Master Perboni, up stairs on the first floor.
At ten o'clock we were all in our classes: fifty-four of us; only fifteen or sixteen of my companions of the second class, among them, Derossi, the one who always gets the first prize.
The school seemed to me so small and gloomy when I thought of the woods and the mountains where I had passed the summer!
I thought again, too, of my master in the second class, who was so good, and who always smiled at us, and was so small that he seemed to be one of us, and I grieved that I should no longer see him there, with his tumbled red hair.
Our teacher is tall; he has no beard; his hair is gray and long; and he has a perpendicular wrinkle on his forehead: he has a big voice, and he looks at us fixedly, one after the other, as though he were reading our inmost thoughts; and he never smiles.
I said to myself: "This is my first day.
There are nine months more.
What toil, what monthly examinations, what fatigue!"
I really needed to see my mother when I came out, and I ran to kiss her hand.
She said to me:-
"Courage, Enrico!
we will study together."
And I returned home content.
But I no longer have my master, with his kind, merry smile, and school does not seem pleasant to me as it did before.
Tuesday, 18th.
My new teacher pleases me also, since this morning.
While we were coming in, and when he was already seated at his post, some one of his scholars of last year every now and then peeped in at the door to salute him; they would present themselves and greet him:-
"Good morning, Signor Teacher!"
"Good morning, Signor Perboni!"
Some entered, touched his hand, and ran away.
It was evident that they liked him, and would have liked to return to him.
He responded, "Good morning," and shook the hands which were extended to him, but he looked at no one; at every greeting his smile remained serious, with that perpendicular wrinkle on his brow, with his face turned towards the window, and staring at the roof of the house opposite; and instead of being cheered by these greetings, he seemed to suffer from them.
Then he surveyed us attentively, one after the other.
While he was dictating, he descended and walked among the benches, and, catching sight of a boy whose face was all red with little pimples, he stopped dictating, took the lad's face between his hands and examined it; then he asked him what was the matter with him, and laid his hand on his forehead, to feel if it was hot.
Meanwhile, a boy behind him got up on the bench, and began to play the marionette.
The teacher turned round suddenly; the boy resumed his seat at one dash, and remained there, with head hanging, in expectation of being punished.
The master placed one hand on his head and said to him:-
"Don't do so again."
Nothing more.
Then he returned to his table and finished the dictation.
When he had finished dictating, he looked at us a moment in silence; then he said, very, very slowly, with his big but kind voice:-
"Listen.
We have a year to pass together; let us see that we pass it well.
Study and be good.
I have no family; you are my family.
Last year I had still a mother: she is dead.
I am left alone.
I have no one but you in all the world; I have no other affection, no other thought than you: you must be my sons.
I wish you well, and you must like me too.
I do not wish to be obliged to punish any one.
Show me that you are boys of heart: our school shall be a family, and you shall be my consolation and my pride.
I do not ask you to give me a promise on your word of honor; I am sure that in your hearts you have already answered me 'yes,' and I thank you."
At that moment the beadle entered to announce the close of school.
We all left our seats very, very quietly.
The boy who had stood up on the bench approached the master, and said to him, in a trembling voice:-
"Forgive me, Signor Master."
The master kissed him on the brow, and said, "Go, my son."
Friday, 21st.
The year has begun with an accident.
On my way to school this morning I was repeating to my father these words of our teacher, when we perceived that the street was full of people, who were pressing close to the door of the schoolhouse.
Suddenly my father said: "An accident!
The year is beginning badly!"
We entered with great difficulty.
The big hall was crowded with parents and children, whom the teachers had not succeeded in drawing off into the class-rooms, and all were turning towards the director's room, and we heard the words, "Poor boy!
Poor Robetti!"
Over their heads, at the end of the room, we could see the helmet of a policeman, and the bald head of the director; then a gentleman with a tall hat entered, and all said, "That is the doctor."
My father inquired of a master, "What has happened?
"-"A wheel has passed over his foot," replied the latter.
"His foot has been crushed," said another.
He was a boy belonging to the second class, who, on his way to school through the Via Dora Grossa, seeing a little child of the lowest class, who had run away from its mother, fall down in the middle of the street, a few paces from an omnibus which was bearing down upon it, had hastened boldly forward, caught up the child, and placed it in safety; but, as he had not withdrawn his own foot quickly enough, the wheel of the omnibus had passed over it.
He is the son of a captain of artillery.
While we were being told this, a woman entered the big hall, like a lunatic, and forced her way through the crowd: she was Robetti's mother, who had been sent for.
Another woman hastened towards her, and flung her arms about her neck, with sobs: it was the mother of the baby who had been saved.
Both flew into the room, and a desperate cry made itself heard: "Oh my Giulio!
My child!"
At that moment a carriage stopped before the door, and a little later the director made his appearance, with the boy in his arms; the latter leaned his head on his shoulder, with pallid face and closed eyes.
Every one stood very still; the sobs of the mother were audible.
The director paused a moment, quite pale, and raised the boy up a little in his arms, in order to show him to the people.
And then the masters, mistresses, parents, and boys all murmured together: "Bravo, Robetti!
Bravo, poor child!"
and they threw kisses to him; the mistresses and boys who were near him kissed his hands and his arms.
He opened his eyes and said, "My portfolio!"
The mother of the little boy whom he had saved showed it to him and said, amid her tears, "I will carry it for you, my dear little angel; I will carry it for you."
And in the meantime, the mother of the wounded boy smiled, as she covered her face with her hands.
They went out, placed the lad comfortably in the carriage, and the carriage drove away.
Then we all entered school in silence.
Saturday, 22d.
Yesterday afternoon, while the master was telling us the news of poor Robetti, who will have to go on crutches, the director entered with a new pupil, a lad with a very brown face, black hair, large black eyes, and thick eyebrows which met on his forehead: he was dressed entirely in dark clothes, with a black morocco belt round his waist.
The director went away, after speaking a few words in the master's ear, leaving beside the latter the boy, who glanced about with his big black eyes as though frightened.
The master took him by the hand, and said to the class: "You ought to be glad.
To-day there enters our school a little Italian born in Reggio, in Calabria, more than five hundred miles from here.
Love your brother who has come from so far away.
He was born in a glorious land, which has given illustrious men to Italy, and which now furnishes her with stout laborers and brave soldiers; in one of the most beautiful lands of our country, where there are great forests, and great mountains, inhabited by people full of talent and courage.
Treat him well, so that he shall not perceive that he is far away from the city in which he was born; make him see that an Italian boy, in whatever Italian school he sets his foot, will find brothers there."
So saying, he rose and pointed out on the wall map of Italy the spot where lay Reggio, in Calabria.
Then he called loudly:-
"Ernesto Derossi!
"-the boy who always has the first prize.
Derossi rose.
"Come here," said the master.
Derossi left his bench and stepped up to the little table, facing the Calabrian.
"As the head boy in the school," said the master to him, "bestow the embrace of welcome on this new companion, in the name of the whole class-the embrace of the sons of Piedmont to the son of Calabria."
Derossi embraced the Calabrian, saying in his clear voice, "Welcome!"
and the other kissed him impetuously on the cheeks.
All clapped their hands.
"Silence!"
cried the master; "don't clap your hands in school!"
But it was evident that he was pleased.
And the Calabrian was pleased also.
The master assigned him a place, and accompanied him to the bench.
Then he said again:-
"Bear well in mind what I have said to you.
In order that this case might occur, that a Calabrian boy should be as though in his own house at Turin, and that a boy from Turin should be at home in Calabria, our country fought for fifty years, and thirty thousand Italians died.
You must all respect and love each other; but any one of you who should give offence to this comrade, because he was not born in our province, would render himself unworthy of ever again raising his eyes from the earth when he passes the tricolored flag."
Hardly was the Calabrian seated in his place, when his neighbors presented him with pens and a print; and another boy, from the last bench, sent him a Swiss postage-stamp.
Tuesday, 25th.
The boy who sent the postage-stamp to the Calabrian is the one who pleases me best of all.
His name is Garrone: he is the biggest boy in the class: he is about fourteen years old; his head is large, his shoulders broad; he is good, as one can see when he smiles; but it seems as though he always thought like a man.
I already know many of my comrades.
Another one pleases me, too, by the name of Coretti, and he wears chocolate-colored trousers and a catskin cap: he is always jolly; he is the son of a huckster of wood, who was a soldier in the war of 1866, in the squadron of Prince Umberto, and they say that he has three medals.
There is little Nelli, a poor hunchback, a weak boy, with a thin face.
There is one who is very well dressed, who always wears fine Florentine plush, and is named Votini.
On the bench in front of me there is a boy who is called "the little mason" because his father is a mason: his face is as round as an apple, with a nose like a small ball; he possesses a special talent: he knows how to make a hare's face, and they all get him to make a hare's face, and then they laugh.
He wears a little ragged cap, which he carries rolled up in his pocket like a handkerchief.
Beside the little mason there sits Garoffi, a long, thin, silly fellow, with a nose and beak of a screech owl, and very small eyes, who is always trafficking in little pens and images and match-boxes, and who writes the lesson on his nails, in order that he may read it on the sly.
Then there is a young gentleman, Carlo Nobis, who seems very haughty; and he is between two boys who are sympathetic to me,-the son of a blacksmith-ironmonger, clad in a jacket which reaches to his knees, who is pale, as though from illness, who always has a frightened air, and who never laughs; and one with red hair, who has a useless arm, and wears it suspended from his neck; his father has gone away to America, and his mother goes about peddling pot-herbs.
And there is another curious type,-my neighbor on the left,-Stardi-small and thickset, with no neck,-a gruff fellow, who speaks to no one, and seems not to understand much, but stands attending to the master without winking, his brow corrugated with wrinkles, and his teeth clenched; and if he is questioned when the master is speaking, he makes no reply the first and second times, and the third time he gives a kick: and beside him there is a bold, cunning face, belonging to a boy named Franti, who has already been expelled from another district.
There are, in addition, two brothers who are dressed exactly alike, who resemble each other to a hair, and both of whom wear caps of Calabrian cut, with a peasant's plume.
But handsomer than all the rest, the one who has the most talent, who will surely be the head this year also, is Derossi; and the master, who has already perceived this, always questions him.
But I like Precossi, the son of the blacksmith-ironmonger, the one with the long jacket, who seems sickly.
They say that his father beats him; he is very timid, and every time that he addresses or touches any one, he says, "Excuse me," and gazes at them with his kind, sad eyes.
But Garrone is the biggest and the nicest.
Wednesday, 26th.
It was this very morning that Garrone let us know what he is like.
When I entered the school a little late, because the mistress of the upper first had stopped me to inquire at what hour she could find me at home, the master had not yet arrived, and three or four boys were tormenting poor Crossi, the one with the red hair, who has a dead arm, and whose mother sells vegetables.
They were poking him with rulers, hitting him in the face with chestnut shells, and were making him out to be a cripple and a monster, by mimicking him, with his arm hanging from his neck.
And he, alone on the end of the bench, and quite pale, began to be affected by it, gazing now at one and now at another with beseeching eyes, that they might leave him in peace.
But the others mocked him worse than ever, and he began to tremble and to turn crimson with rage.
All at once, Franti, the boy with the repulsive face, sprang upon a bench, and pretending that he was carrying a basket on each arm, he aped the mother of Crossi, when she used to come to wait for her son at the door; for she is ill now.
Many began to laugh loudly.
Then Crossi lost his head, and seizing an inkstand, he hurled it at the other's head with all his strength; but Franti dodged, and the inkstand struck the master, who entered at the moment, full in the breast.
All flew to their places, and became silent with terror.
The master, quite pale, went to his table, and said in a constrained voice:-
"Who did it?"
No one replied.
The master cried out once more, raising his voice still louder, "Who is it?"
Then Garrone, moved to pity for poor Crossi, rose abruptly and said, resolutely, "It was I."
The master looked at him, looked at the stupefied scholars; then said in a tranquil voice, "It was not you."
And, after a moment: "The culprit shall not be punished.
Let him rise!"
Crossi rose and said, weeping, "They were striking me and insulting me, and I lost my head, and threw it."
"Sit down," said the master.
"Let those who provoked him rise."
Four rose, and hung their heads.
"You," said the master, "have insulted a companion who had given you no provocation; you have scoffed at an unfortunate lad, you have struck a weak person who could not defend himself.
You have committed one of the basest, the most shameful acts with which a human creature can stain himself.
Cowards!"
Having said this, he came down among the benches, put his hand under Garrone's chin, as the latter stood with drooping head, and having made him raise it, he looked him straight in the eye, and said to him, "You are a noble soul."
Garrone profited by the occasion to murmur some words, I know not what, in the ear of the master; and he, turning towards the four culprits, said, abruptly, "I forgive you."
Thursday, 27th.
My schoolmistress has kept her promise which she made, and came to-day just as I was on the point of going out with my mother to carry some linen to a poor woman recommended by the Gazette.
It was a year since I had seen her in our house.
We all made a great deal of her.
She is just the same as ever, a little thing, with a green veil wound about her bonnet, carelessly dressed, and with untidy hair, because she has not time to keep herself nice; but with a little less color than last year, with some white hairs, and a constant cough.
My mother said to her:-
"And your health, my dear mistress?
You do not take sufficient care of yourself!"
"It does not matter," the other replied, with her smile, at once cheerful and melancholy.
"You speak too loud," my mother added; "you exert yourself too much with your boys."
That is true; her voice is always to be heard; I remember how it was when I went to school to her; she talked and talked all the time, so that the boys might not divert their attention, and she did not remain seated a moment.
I felt quite sure that she would come, because she never forgets her pupils; she remembers their names for years; on the days of the monthly examination, she runs to ask the director what marks they have won; she waits for them at the entrance, and makes them show her their compositions, in order that she may see what progress they have made; and many still come from the gymnasium to see her, who already wear long trousers and a watch.
To-day she had come back in a great state of excitement, from the picture-gallery, whither she had taken her boys, just as she had conducted them all to a museum every Thursday in years gone by, and explained everything to them.
The poor mistress has grown still thinner than of old.
But she is always brisk, and always becomes animated when she speaks of her school.
She wanted to have a peep at the bed on which she had seen me lying very ill two years ago, and which is now occupied by my brother; she gazed at it for a while, and could not speak.
She was obliged to go away soon to visit a boy belonging to her class, the son of a saddler, who is ill with the measles; and she had besides a package of sheets to correct, a whole evening's work, and she has still a private lesson in arithmetic to give to the mistress of a shop before nightfall.
"Well, Enrico," she said to me as she was going, "are you still fond of your schoolmistress, now that you solve difficult problems and write long compositions?"
She kissed me, and called up once more from the foot of the stairs: "You are not to forget me, you know, Enrico!"
Oh, my kind teacher, never, never will I forget thee!
Even when I grow up I will remember thee and will go to seek thee among thy boys; and every time that I pass near a school and hear the voice of a schoolmistress, I shall think that I hear thy voice, and I shall recall the two years that I passed in thy school, where I learned so many things, where I so often saw thee ill and weary, but always earnest, always indulgent, in despair when any one acquired a bad trick in the writing-fingers, trembling when the examiners interrogated us, happy when we made a good appearance, always kind and loving as a mother.
Never, never shall I forget thee, my teacher!
Friday, 28th.
Yesterday afternoon I went with my mother and my sister Sylvia, to carry the linen to the poor woman recommended by the newspaper: I carried the bundle; Sylvia had the paper with the initials of the name and the address.
We climbed to the very roof of a tall house, to a long corridor with many doors.
My mother knocked at the last; it was opened by a woman who was still young, blond and thin, and it instantly struck me that I had seen her many times before, with that very same blue kerchief that she wore on her head.
"Are you the person of whom the newspaper says so and so?"
asked my mother.
"Yes, signora, I am."
"Well, we have brought you a little linen."
Then the woman began to thank us and bless us, and could not make enough of it.
Meanwhile I espied in one corner of the bare, dark room, a boy kneeling in front of a chair, with his back turned towards us, who appeared to be writing; and he really was writing, with his paper on the chair and his inkstand on the floor.
How did he manage to write thus in the dark?
While I was saying this to myself, I suddenly recognized the red hair and the coarse jacket of Crossi, the son of the vegetable-pedler, the boy with the useless arm.
I told my mother softly, while the woman was putting away the things.
"Hush!"
replied my mother; "perhaps he will feel ashamed to see you giving alms to his mother: don't speak to him."
But at that moment Crossi turned round; I was embarrassed; he smiled, and then my mother gave me a push, so that I should run to him and embrace him.
I did embrace him: he rose and took me by the hand.
"Here I am," his mother was saying in the meantime to my mother, "alone with this boy, my husband in America these seven years, and I sick in addition, so that I can no longer make my rounds with my vegetables, and earn a few cents.
We have not even a table left for my poor Luigino to do his work on.
When there was a bench down at the door, he could, at least, write on the bench; but that has been taken away.
He has not even a little light so that he can study without ruining his eyes.
And it is a mercy that I can send him to school, since the city provides him with books and copy-books.
Poor Luigino, who would be so glad to study!
Unhappy woman, that I am!"
My mother gave her all that she had in her purse, kissed the boy, and almost wept as we went out.
And she had good cause to say to me: "Look at that poor boy; see how he is forced to work, when you have every comfort, and yet study seems hard to you!
Ah!
Enrico, there is more merit in the work which he does in one day, than in your work for a year.
It is to such that the first prizes should be given!"
Friday, 28th.
Yes, study comes hard to you, my dear Enrico, as your mother says: I do not yet see you set out for school with that resolute mind and that smiling face which I should like.
You are still intractable.
But listen; reflect a little!
What a miserable, despicable thing your day would be if you did not go to school!
At the end of a week you would beg with clasped hands that you might return there, for you would be eaten up with weariness and shame; disgusted with your sports and with your existence.
Everybody, everybody studies now, my child.
Think of the workmen who go to school in the evening after having toiled all the day; think of the women, of the girls of the people, who go to school on Sunday, after having worked all the week; of the soldiers who turn to their books and copy-books when they return exhausted from their drill!
Think of the dumb and of the boys who are blind, but who study, nevertheless; and last of all, think of the prisoners, who also learn to read and write.
Reflect in the morning, when you set out, that at that very moment, in your own city, thirty thousand other boys are going like yourself, to shut themselves up in a room for three hours and study.
Think of the innumerable boys who, at nearly this precise hour, are going to school in all countries.
Behold them with your imagination, going, going, through the lanes of quiet villages; through the streets of the noisy towns, along the shores of rivers and lakes; here beneath a burning sun; there amid fogs, in boats, in countries which are intersected with canals; on horseback on the far-reaching plains; in sledges over the snow; through valleys and over hills; across forests and torrents, over the solitary paths of mountains; alone, in couples, in groups, in long files, all with their books under their arms, clad in a thousand ways, speaking a thousand tongues, from the most remote schools in Russia.
Almost lost in the ice to the furthermost schools of Arabia, shaded by palm-trees, millions and millions, all going to learn the same things, in a hundred varied forms.
Imagine this vast, vast throng of boys of a hundred races, this immense movement of which you form a part, and think, if this movement were to cease, humanity would fall back into barbarism; this movement is the progress, the hope, the glory of the world.
Courage, then, little soldier of the immense army.
Your books are your arms, your class is your squadron, the field of battle is the whole earth, and the victory is human civilization.
Be not a cowardly soldier, my Enrico.
THY FATHER.
(The Monthly Story.)
Saturday, 29th.
I will not be a cowardly soldier, no; but I should be much more willing to go to school if the master would tell us a story every day, like the one he told us this morning.
"Every month," said he, "I shall tell you one; I shall give it to you in writing, and it will always be the tale of a fine and noble deed performed by a boy.
This one is called The Little Patriot of Padua.
Here it is.
A French steamer set out from Barcelona, a city in Spain, for Genoa; there were on board Frenchmen, Italians, Spaniards, and Swiss.
Among the rest was a lad of eleven, poorly clad, and alone, who always held himself aloof, like a wild animal, and stared at all with gloomy eyes.
He had good reasons for looking at every one with forbidding eyes.
Two years previous to this time his parents, peasants in the neighborhood of Padua, had sold him to a company of mountebanks, who, after they had taught him how to perform tricks, by dint of blows and kicks and starving, had carried him all over France and Spain, beating him continually and never giving him enough to eat.
On his arrival in Barcelona, being no longer able to endure ill treatment and hunger, and being reduced to a pitiable condition, he had fled from his slave-master and had betaken himself for protection to the Italian consul, who, moved with compassion, had placed him on board of this steamer, and had given him a letter to the treasurer of Genoa, who was to send the boy back to his parents-to the parents who had sold him like a beast.
The poor lad was lacerated and weak.
He had been assigned to the second-class cabin.
Every one stared at him; some questioned him, but he made no reply, and seemed to hate and despise every one, to such an extent had privation and affliction saddened and irritated him.
Nevertheless, three travellers, by dint of persisting in their questions, succeeded in making him unloose his tongue; and in a few rough words, a mixture of Venetian, French, and Spanish, he related his story.
These three travellers were not Italians, but they understood him; and partly out of compassion, partly because they were excited with wine, they gave him soldi, jesting with him and urging him on to tell them other things; and as several ladies entered the saloon at the moment, they gave him some more money for the purpose of making a show, and cried: 'Take this!
Take this, too!'
as they made the money rattle on the table.
"The boy pocketed it all, thanking them in a low voice, with his surly mien, but with a look that was for the first time smiling and affectionate.
Then he climbed into his berth, drew the curtain, and lay quiet, thinking over his affairs.
With this money he would be able to purchase some good food on board, after having suffered for lack of bread for two years; he could buy a jacket as soon as he landed in Genoa, after having gone about clad in rags for two years; and he could also, by carrying it home, insure for himself from his father and mother a more humane reception than would have fallen to his lot if he had arrived with empty pockets.
This money was a little fortune for him; and he was taking comfort out of this thought behind the curtain of his berth, while the three travellers chatted away, as they sat round the dining-table in the second-class saloon.
They were drinking and discussing their travels and the countries which they had seen; and from one topic to another they began to discuss Italy.
One of them began to complain of the inns, another of the railways, and then, growing warmer, they all began to speak evil of everything.
One would have preferred a trip in Lapland; another declared that he had found nothing but swindlers and brigands in Italy; the third said that Italian officials do not know how to read.
"'It's an ignorant nation,' repeated the first.
'A filthy nation,' added the second.
'Ro-' exclaimed the third, meaning to say 'robbers'; but he was not allowed to finish the word: a tempest of soldi and half-lire descended upon their heads and shoulders, and leaped upon the table and the floor with a demoniacal noise.
All three sprang up in a rage, looked up, and received another handful of coppers in their faces.
"'Take back your soldi!'
said the lad, disdainfully, thrusting his head between the curtains of his berth; 'I do not accept alms from those who insult my country.'"
November 1st.
Yesterday afternoon I went to the girls' school building, near ours, to give the story of the boy from Padua to Silvia's teacher, who wished to read it.
There are seven hundred girls there.
Just as I arrived, they began to come out, all greatly rejoiced at the holiday of All Saints and All Souls; and here is a beautiful thing that I saw: Opposite the door of the school, on the other side of the street, stood a very small chimney-sweep, his face entirely black, with his sack and scraper, with one arm resting against the wall, and his head supported on his arm, weeping copiously and sobbing.
Two or three of the girls of the second grade approached him and said, "What is the matter, that you weep like this?"
But he made no reply, and went on crying.
"Come, tell us what is the matter with you and why you are crying," the girls repeated.
And then he raised his face from his arm,-a baby face,-and said through his tears that he had been to several houses to sweep the chimneys, and had earned thirty soldi, and that he had lost them, that they had slipped through a hole in his pocket,-and he showed the hole,-and he did not dare to return home without the money.
"The master will beat me," he said, sobbing; and again dropped his head upon his arm, like one in despair.
The children stood and stared at him very seriously.
In the meantime, other girls, large and small, poor girls and girls of the upper classes, with their portfolios under their arms, had come up; and one large girl, who had a blue feather in her hat, pulled two soldi from her pocket, and said:-
"I have only two soldi; let us make a collection."
"I have two soldi, also," said another girl, dressed in red; "we shall certainly find thirty soldi among the whole of us"; and then they began to call out:-
"Amalia!
Luigia!
Annina!-A soldo.
Who has any soldi?
Bring your soldi here!"
Several had soldi to buy flowers or copy-books, and they brought them; some of the smaller girls gave centesimi; the one with the blue feather collected all, and counted them in a loud voice:-
"Eight, ten, fifteen!"
But more was needed.
Then one larger than any of them, who seemed to be an assistant mistress, made her appearance, and gave half a lira; and all made much of her.
Five soldi were still lacking.
"The girls of the fourth class are coming; they will have it," said one girl.
The members of the fourth class came, and the soldi showered down.
All hurried forward eagerly; and it was beautiful to see that poor chimney-sweep in the midst of all those many-colored dresses, of all that whirl of feathers, ribbons, and curls.
The thirty soldi were already obtained, and more kept pouring in; and the very smallest who had no money made their way among the big girls, and offered their bunches of flowers, for the sake of giving something.
All at once the portress made her appearance, screaming:-
"The Signora Directress!"
The girls made their escape in all directions, like a flock of sparrows; and then the little chimney-sweep was visible, alone, in the middle of the street, wiping his eyes in perfect content, with his hands full of money, and the button-holes of his jacket, his pockets, his hat, were full of flowers; and there were even flowers on the ground at his feet.
(All-Souls-Day.)
November 2d.
This day is consecrated to the commemoration of the dead.
Do you know, Enrico, that all you boys should, on this day, devote a thought to those who are dead?
To those who have died for you,-for boys and little children.
How many have died, and how many are dying continually!
Have you ever reflected how many fathers have worn out their lives in toil?
how many mothers have descended to the grave before their time, exhausted by the privations to which they have condemned themselves for the sake of sustaining their children?
Do you know how many men have planted a knife in their hearts in despair at beholding their children in misery?
how many women have drowned themselves or have died of sorrow, or have gone mad, through having lost a child?
Think of all these dead on this day, Enrico.
Think of how many schoolmistresses have died young, have pined away through the fatigues of the school, through love of the children, from whom they had not the heart to tear themselves away; think of the doctors who have perished of contagious diseases, having courageously sacrificed themselves to cure the children; think of all those who in shipwrecks, in conflagrations, in famines, in moments of supreme danger, have yielded to infancy the last morsel of bread, the last place of safety, the last rope of escape from the flames, to expire content with their sacrifice, since they preserved the life of a little innocent.
Such dead as these are innumerable, Enrico; every graveyard contains hundreds of these sainted beings, who, if they could rise for a moment from their graves, would cry the name of a child to whom they sacrificed the pleasures of youth, the peace of old age, their affections, their intelligence, their life: wives of twenty, men in the flower of their strength, octogenarians, youths,-heroic and obscure martyrs of infancy,-so grand and so noble, that the earth does not produce as many flowers as should strew their graves.
To such a degree are ye loved, O children!
Think to-day on those dead with gratitude, and you will be kinder and more affectionate to all those who love you, and who toil for you, my dear, fortunate son, who, on the day of the dead, have, as yet, no one to grieve for.
THY MOTHER.
Friday, 4th.
THERE had been but two days of vacation, yet it seemed to me as though I had been a long time without seeing Garrone.
The more I know him, the better I like him; and so it is with all the rest, except with the overbearing, who have nothing to say to him, because he does not permit them to exhibit their oppression.
Every time that a big boy raises his hand against a little one, the little one shouts, "Garrone!"
and the big one stops striking him.
His father is an engine-driver on the railway; he has begun school late, because he was ill for two years.
He is the tallest and the strongest of the class; he lifts a bench with one hand; he is always eating; and he is good.
Whatever he is asked for,-a pencil, rubber, paper, or penknife,-he lends or gives it; and he neither talks nor laughs in school: he always sits perfectly motionless on a bench that is too narrow for him, with his spine curved forward, and his big head between his shoulders; and when I look at him, he smiles at me with his eyes half closed, as much as to say, "Well, Enrico, are we friends?"
He makes me laugh, because, tall and broad as he is, he has a jacket, trousers, and sleeves which are too small for him, and too short; a cap which will not stay on his head; a threadbare cloak; coarse shoes; and a necktie which is always twisted into a cord.
Dear Garrone!
it needs but one glance in thy face to inspire love for thee.
All the little boys would like to be near his bench.
He knows arithmetic well.
He carries his books bound together with a strap of red leather.
He has a knife, with a mother-of-pearl handle, which he found in the field for military manoeuvres, last year, and one day he cut his finger to the bone; but no one in school envies him it, and no one breathes a word about it at home, for fear of alarming his parents.
He lets us say anything to him in jest, and he never takes it ill; but woe to any one who says to him, "That is not true," when he affirms a thing: then fire flashes from his eyes, and he hammers down blows enough to split the bench.
Saturday morning he gave a soldo to one of the upper first class, who was crying in the middle of the street, because his own had been taken from him, and he could not buy his copy-book.
For the last three days he has been working over a letter of eight pages, with pen ornaments on the margins, for the saint's day of his mother, who often comes to get him, and who, like himself, is tall and large and sympathetic.
The master is always glancing at him, and every time that he passes near him he taps him on the neck with his hand, as though he were a good, peaceable young bull.
I am very fond of him.
I am happy when I press his big hand, which seems to be the hand of a man, in mine.
I am almost certain that he would risk his life to save that of a comrade; that he would allow himself to be killed in his defence, so clearly can I read his eyes; and although he always seems to be grumbling with that big voice of his, one feels that it is a voice that comes from a gentle heart.
Monday, 7th.
Garrone would certainly never have uttered the words which Carlo Nobis spoke yesterday morning to Betti.
Carlo Nobis is proud, because his father is a great gentleman; a tall gentleman, with a black beard, and very serious, who accompanies his son to school nearly every day.
Yesterday morning Nobis quarrelled with Betti, one of the smallest boys, and the son of a charcoal-man, and not knowing what retort to make, because he was in the wrong, said to him vehemently, "Your father is a tattered beggar!"
Betti reddened up to his very hair, and said nothing, but the tears came to his eyes; and when he returned home, he repeated the words to his father; so the charcoal-dealer, a little man, who was black all over, made his appearance at the afternoon session, leading his boy by the hand, in order to complain to the master.
While he was making his complaint, and every one was silent, the father of Nobis, who was taking off his son's coat at the entrance, as usual, entered on hearing his name pronounced, and demanded an explanation.
"This workman has come," said the master, "to complain that your son Carlo said to his boy, 'Your father is a tattered beggar.'"
Nobis's father frowned and reddened slightly.
Then he asked his son, "Did you say that?"
His son, who was standing in the middle of the school, with his head hanging, in front of little Betti, made no reply.
Then his father grasped him by one arm and pushed him forward, facing Betti, so that they nearly touched, and said to him, "Beg his pardon."
The charcoal-man tried to interpose, saying, "No, no!"
but the gentleman paid no heed to him, and repeated to his son, "Beg his pardon.
Repeat my words.
'I beg your pardon for the insulting, foolish, and ignoble words which I uttered against your father, whose hand my father would feel himself honored to press.'"
The charcoal-man made a resolute gesture, as though to say, "I will not allow it."
The gentleman did not second him, and his son said slowly, in a very thread of a voice, without raising his eyes from the ground, "I beg your pardon-for the insulting-foolish-ignoble-words which I uttered against your father, whose hand my father-would feel himself honored-to press."
Then the gentleman offered his hand to the charcoal-man, who shook it vigorously, and then, with a sudden push, he thrust his son into the arms of Carlo Nobis.
"Do me the favor to place them next each other," said the gentleman to the master.
The master put Betti on Nobis's bench.
When they were seated, the father of Nobis bowed and went away.
The charcoal-man remained standing there in thought for several moments, gazing at the two boys side by side; then he approached the bench, and fixed upon Nobis a look expressive of affection and regret, as though he were desirous of saying something to him, but he did not say anything; he stretched out his hand to bestow a caress upon him, but he did not dare, and merely stroked his brow with his large fingers.
Then he made his way to the door, and turning round for one last look, he disappeared.
"Fix what you have just seen firmly in your minds, boys," said the master; "this is the finest lesson of the year."
Thursday, 10th.
The son of the charcoal-man had been a pupil of that schoolmistress Delcati who had come to see my brother when he was ill, and who had made us laugh by telling us how, two years ago, the mother of this boy had brought to her house a big apronful of charcoal, out of gratitude for her having given the medal to her son; and the poor woman had persisted, and had not been willing to carry the coal home again, and had wept when she was obliged to go away with her apron quite full.
And she told us, also, of another good woman, who had brought her a very heavy bunch of flowers, inside of which there was a little hoard of soldi.
We had been greatly diverted in listening to her, and so my brother had swallowed his medicine, which he had not been willing to do before.
How much patience is necessary with those boys of the lower first, all toothless, like old men, who cannot pronounce their r's and s's; and one coughs, and another has the nosebleed, and another loses his shoes under the bench, and another bellows because he has pricked himself with his pen, and another one cries because he has bought copy-book No.
2 instead of No.
1.
Fifty in a class, who know nothing, with those flabby little hands, and all of them must be taught to write; they carry in their pockets bits of licorice, buttons, phial corks, pounded brick,-all sorts of little things, and the teacher has to search them; but they conceal these objects even in their shoes.
And they are not attentive: a fly enters through the window, and throws them all into confusion; and in summer they bring grass into school, and horn-bugs, which fly round in circles or fall into the inkstand, and then streak the copy-books all over with ink.
The schoolmistress has to play mother to all of them, to help them dress themselves, bandage up their pricked fingers, pick up their caps when they drop them, watch to see that they do not exchange coats, and that they do not indulge in cat-calls and shrieks.
Poor schoolmistresses!
And then the mothers come to complain: "How comes it, signorina, that my boy has lost his pen?
How does it happen that mine learns nothing?
Why is not my boy mentioned honorably, when he knows so much?
Why don't you have that nail which tore my Piero's trousers, taken out of the bench?"
Sometimes my brother's teacher gets into a rage with the boys; and when she can resist no longer, she bites her finger, to keep herself from dealing a blow; she loses patience, and then she repents, and caresses the child whom she has scolded; she sends a little rogue out of school, and then swallows her tears, and flies into a rage with parents who make the little ones fast by way of punishment.
Schoolmistress Delcati is young and tall, well-dressed, brown of complexion, and restless; she does everything vivaciously, as though on springs, is affected by a mere trifle, and at such times speaks with great tenderness.
"But the children become attached to you, surely," my mother said to her.
"Many do," she replied; "but at the end of the year the majority of them pay no further heed to us.
When they are with the masters, they are almost ashamed of having been with us-with a woman teacher.
After two years of cares, after having loved a child so much, it makes us feel sad to part from him; but we say to ourselves, 'Oh, I am sure of that one; he is fond of me.'
But the vacation over, he comes back to school.
I run to meet him; 'Oh, my child, my child!'
And he turns his head away."
Here the teacher interrupted herself.
"But you will not do so, little one?"
she said, raising her humid eyes, and kissing my brother.
"You will not turn aside your head, will you?
You will not deny your poor friend?"
Thursday, November 10th.
In the presence of your brother's teacher you failed in respect to your mother!
Let this never happen again, my Enrico, never again!
Your irreverent word pierced my heart like a point of steel.
I thought of your mother when, years ago, she bent the whole of one night over your little bed, measuring your breathing, weeping blood in her anguish, and with her teeth chattering with terror, because she thought that she had lost you, and I feared that she would lose her reason; and at this thought I felt a sentiment of horror at you.
You, to offend your mother!
your mother, who would give a year of happiness to spare you one hour of pain, who would beg for you, who would allow herself to be killed to save your life!
Listen, Enrico.
Fix this thought well in your mind.
Reflect that you are destined to experience many terrible days in the course of your life: the most terrible will be that on which you lose your mother.
A thousand times, Enrico, after you are a man, strong, and inured to all fates, you will invoke her, oppressed with an intense desire to hear her voice, if but for a moment, and to see once more her open arms, into which you can throw yourself sobbing, like a poor child bereft of comfort and protection.
How you will then recall every bitterness that you have caused her, and with what remorse you will pay for all, unhappy wretch!
Hope for no peace in your life, if you have caused your mother grief.
You will repent, you will beg her forgiveness, you will venerate her memory-in vain; conscience will give you no rest; that sweet and gentle image will always wear for you an expression of sadness and of reproach which will put your soul to torture.
Oh, Enrico, beware; this is the most sacred of human affections; unhappy he who tramples it under foot.
The assassin who respects his mother has still something honest and noble in his heart; the most glorious of men who grieves and offends her is but a vile creature.
Never again let a harsh word issue from your lips, for the being who gave you life.
And if one should ever escape you, let it not be the fear of your father, but let it be the impulse of your soul, which casts you at her feet, to beseech her that she will cancel from your brow, with the kiss of forgiveness, the stain of ingratitude.
I love you, my son; you are the dearest hope of my life; but I would rather see you dead than ungrateful to your mother.
Go away, for a little space; offer me no more of your caresses; I should not be able to return them from my heart.
THY FATHER.
Sunday, 13th.
My father forgave me; but I remained rather sad and then my mother sent me, with the porter's big son, to take a walk on the Corso.
Half-way down the Corso, as we were passing a cart which was standing in front of a shop, I heard some one call me by name: I turned round; it was Coretti, my schoolmate, with chocolate-colored clothes and his catskin cap, all in a perspiration, but merry, with a big load of wood on his shoulders.
A man who was standing in the cart was handing him an armful of wood at a time, which he took and carried into his father's shop, where he piled it up in the greatest haste.
"What are you doing, Coretti?"
I asked him.
"Don't you see?"
he answered, reaching out his arms to receive the load; "I am reviewing my lesson."
I laughed; but he seemed to be serious, and, having grasped the armful of wood, he began to repeat as he ran, " The conjugation of the verb-consists in its variations according to number-according to number and person- "
And then, throwing down the wood and piling it, " according to the time-according to the time to which the action refers. "
And turning to the cart for another armful, " according to the mode in which the action is enunciated. "
It was our grammar lesson for the following day.
"What would you have me do?"
he said.
"I am putting my time to use.
My father has gone off with the man on business; my mother is ill.
It falls to me to do the unloading.
In the meantime, I am going over my grammar lesson.
It is a difficult lesson to-day; I cannot succeed in getting it into my head.-My father said that he would be here at seven o'clock to give you your money," he said to the man with the cart.
The cart drove off.
"Come into the shop a minute," Coretti said to me.
I went in.
It was a large apartment, full of piles of wood and fagots, with a steelyard on one side.
"This is a busy day, I can assure you," resumed Coretti; "I have to do my work by fits and starts.
I was writing my phrases, when some customers came in.
I went to writing again, and behold, that cart arrived.
I have already made two trips to the wood market in the Piazza Venezia this morning.
My legs are so tired that I cannot stand, and my hands are all swollen.
I should be in a pretty pickle if I had to draw!"
And as he spoke he set about sweeping up the dry leaves and the straw which covered the brick-paved floor.
"But where do you do your work, Coretti?"
I inquired.
"Not here, certainly," he replied.
"Come and see"; and he led me into a little room behind the shop, which serves as a kitchen and dining-room, with a table in one corner, on which there were books and copy-books, and work which had been begun.
"Here it is," he said; "I left the second answer unfinished: with which shoes are made, and belts.
Now I will add, and valises."
And, taking his pen, he began to write in his fine hand.
"Is there any one here?"
sounded a call from the shop at that moment.
It was a woman who had come to buy some little fagots.
"Here I am!"
replied Coretti; and he sprang out, weighed the fagots, took the money, ran to a corner to enter the sale in a shabby old account-book, and returned to his work, saying, "Let's see if I can finish that sentence."
And he wrote, travelling-bags, and knapsacks for soldiers.
"Oh, my poor coffee is boiling over!"
he exclaimed, and ran to the stove to take the coffee-pot from the fire.
"It is coffee for mamma," he said; "I had to learn how to make it.
Wait a while, and we will carry it to her; you'll see what pleasure it will give her.
She has been in bed a whole week.-Conjugation of the verb!
I always scald my fingers with this coffee-pot.
What is there that I can add after the soldiers' knapsacks?
Something more is needed, and I can think of nothing.
Come to mamma."
He opened a door, and we entered another small room: there Coretti's mother lay in a big bed, with a white kerchief wound round her head.
"Ah, brave little master!"
said the woman to me; "you have come to visit the sick, have you not?"
Meanwhile, Coretti was arranging the pillows behind his mother's back, readjusting the bedclothes, brightening up the fire, and driving the cat off the chest of drawers.
"Do you want anything else, mamma?"
he asked, as he took the cup from her.
"Have you taken the two spoonfuls of syrup?
When it is all gone, I will make a trip to the apothecary's.
The wood is unloaded.
At four o'clock I will put the meat on the stove, as you told me; and when the butter-woman passes, I will give her those eight soldi.
Everything will go on well; so don't give it a thought."
"Thanks, my son!"
replied the woman.
"Go, my poor boy!-he thinks of everything."
She insisted that I should take a lump of sugar; and then Coretti showed me a little picture,-the photograph portrait of his father dressed as a soldier, with the medal for bravery which he had won in 1866, in the troop of Prince Umberto: he had the same face as his son, with the same vivacious eyes and his merry smile.
We went back to the kitchen.
"I have found the thing," said Coretti; and he added on his copy-book, horse-trappings are also made of it.
"The rest I will do this evening; I shall sit up later.
How happy you are, to have time to study and to go to walk, too!"
And still gay and active, he re-entered the shop, and began to place pieces of wood on the horse and to saw them, saying: "This is gymnastics; it is quite different from the throw your arms forwards.
I want my father to find all this wood sawed when he gets home; how glad he will be!
The worst part of it is that after sawing I make T's and L's which look like snakes, so the teacher says.
What am I to do?
I will tell him that I have to move my arms about.
The important thing is to have mamma get well quickly.
She is better to-day, thank Heaven!
I will study my grammar to-morrow morning at cock-crow.
Oh, here's the cart with logs!
To work!"
A small cart laden with logs halted in front of the shop.
Coretti ran out to speak to the man, then returned: "I cannot keep your company any longer now," he said; "farewell until to-morrow.
You did right to come and hunt me up.
A pleasant walk to you!
happy fellow!"
And pressing my hand, he ran to take the first log, and began once more to trot back and forth between the cart and the shop, with a face as fresh as a rose beneath his catskin cap, and so alert that it was a pleasure to see him.
"Happy fellow!"
he had said to me.
Ah, no, Coretti, no; you are the happier, because you study and work too; because you are of use to your father and your mother; because you are better-a hundred times better-and more courageous than I, my dear schoolmate.
Friday, 18th.
Coretti was pleased this morning, because his master of the second class, Coatti, a big man, with a huge head of curly hair, a great black beard, big dark eyes, and a voice like a cannon, had come to assist in the work of the monthly examination.
He is always threatening the boys that he will break them in pieces and carry them by the nape of the neck to the quaestor, and he makes all sorts of frightful faces; but he never punishes any one, but always smiles the while behind his beard, so that no one can see it.
There are eight masters in all, including Coatti, and a little, beardless assistant, who looks like a boy.
There is one master of the fourth class, who is lame and always wrapped up in a big woollen scarf, and who is always suffering from pains which he contracted when he was a teacher in the country, in a damp school, where the walls were dripping with moisture.
Another of the teachers of the fourth is old and perfectly white-haired, and has been a teacher of the blind.
There is one well-dressed master, with eye-glasses, and a blond mustache, who is called the little lawyer, because, while he was teaching, he studied law and took his diploma; and he is also making a book to teach how to write letters.
On the other hand, the one who teaches gymnastics is of a soldierly type, and was with Garibaldi, and has on his neck a scar from a sabre wound received at the battle of Milazzo.
Then there is the head-master, who is tall and bald, and wears gold spectacles, with a gray beard that flows down upon his breast; he dresses entirely in black, and is always buttoned up to the chin.
He is so kind to the boys, that when they enter the director's room, all in a tremble, because they have been summoned to receive a reproof, he does not scold them, but takes them by the hand, and tells them so many reasons why they ought not to behave so, and why they should be sorry, and promise to be good, and he speaks in such a kind manner, and in so gentle a voice, that they all come out with red eyes, more confused than if they had been punished.
Poor head-master!
he is always the first at his post in the morning, waiting for the scholars and lending an ear to the parents; and when the other masters are already on their way home, he is still hovering about the school, and looking out that the boys do not get under the carriage-wheels, or hang about the streets to stand on their heads, or fill their bags with sand or stones; and the moment he makes his appearance at a corner, so tall and black, flocks of boys scamper off in all directions, abandoning their games of coppers and marbles, and he threatens them from afar with his forefinger, with his sad and loving air.
No one has ever seen him smile, my mother says, since the death of his son, who was a volunteer in the army: he always keeps the latter's portrait before his eyes, on a little table in the head-master's room.
He wanted to go away after this misfortune; he prepared his application for retirement to the Municipal Council, and kept it always on his table, putting off sending it from day to day, because it grieved him to leave the boys.
But the other day he seemed undecided; and my father, who was in the director's room with him, was just saying to him, "What a shame it is that you are going away, Signor Director!"
when a man entered for the purpose of inscribing the name of a boy who was to be transferred from another schoolhouse to ours, because he had changed his residence.
At the sight of this boy, the head-master made a gesture of astonishment, gazed at him for a while, gazed at the portrait that he keeps on his little table, and then stared at the boy again, as he drew him between his knees, and made him hold up his head.
This boy resembled his dead son.
The head-master said, "It is all right," wrote down his name, dismissed the father and son, and remained absorbed in thought.
"What a pity that you are going away!"
repeated my father.
And then the head-master took up his application for retirement, tore it in two, and said, "I shall remain."
Tuesday, 22d.
His son had been a volunteer in the army when he died: this is the reason why the head-master always goes to the Corso to see the soldiers pass, when we come out of school.
Yesterday a regiment of infantry was passing, and fifty boys began to dance around the band, singing and beating time with their rulers on their bags and portfolios.
We were standing in a group on the sidewalk, watching them: Garrone, squeezed into his clothes, which were too tight for him, was biting at a large piece of bread; Votini, the well-dressed boy, who always wears Florence plush; Precossi, the son of the blacksmith, with his father's jacket; and the Calabrian; and the "little mason"; and Crossi, with his red head; and Franti, with his bold face; and Robetti, too, the son of the artillery captain, the boy who saved the child from the omnibus, and who now walks on crutches.
Franti burst into a derisive laugh, in the face of a soldier who was limping.
But all at once he felt a man's hand on his shoulder: he turned round; it was the head-master.
"Take care," said the master to him; "jeering at a soldier when he is in the ranks, when he can neither avenge himself nor reply, is like insulting a man who is bound: it is baseness."
Franti disappeared.
The soldiers were marching by fours, all perspiring and covered with dust, and their guns were gleaming in the sun.
The head-master said:-
"You ought to feel kindly towards soldiers, boys.
They are our defenders, who would go to be killed for our sakes, if a foreign army were to menace our country to-morrow.
They are boys too; they are not many years older than you; and they, too, go to school; and there are poor men and gentlemen among them, just as there are among you, and they come from every part of Italy.
See if you cannot recognize them by their faces; Sicilians are passing, and Sardinians, and Neapolitans, and Lombards.
This is an old regiment, one of those which fought in 1848.
They are not the same soldiers, but the flag is still the same.
How many have already died for our country around that banner twenty years before you were born!"
"Here it is!"
said Garrone.
And in fact, not far off, the flag was visible, advancing, above the heads of the soldiers.
"Do one thing, my sons," said the head-master; "make your scholar's salute, with your hand to your brow, when the tricolor passes."
The flag, borne by an officer, passed before us, all tattered and faded, and with the medals attached to the staff.
We put our hands to our foreheads, all together.
The officer looked at us with a smile, and returned our salute with his hand.
"Bravi, boys!"
said some one behind us.
We turned to look; it was an old man who wore in his button-hole the blue ribbon of the Crimean campaign-a pensioned officer.
"Bravi!"
he said; "you have done a fine deed."
In the meantime, the band of the regiment had made a turn at the end of the Corso, surrounded by a throng of boys, and a hundred merry shouts accompanied the blasts of the trumpets, like a war-song.
"Bravi!"
repeated the old officer, as he gazed upon us; "he who respects the flag when he is little will know how to defend it when he is grown up."
Wednesday, 23d.
Nelli, too, poor little hunchback!
was looking at the soldiers yesterday, but with an air as though he were thinking, "I can never be a soldier!"
He is good, and he studies; but he is so puny and wan, and he breathes with difficulty.
He always wears a long apron of shining black cloth.
His mother is a little blond woman who dresses in black, and always comes to get him at the end of school, so that he may not come out in the confusion with the others, and she caresses him.
At first many of the boys ridiculed him, and thumped him on the back with their bags, because he is so unfortunate as to be a hunchback; but he never offered any resistance, and never said anything to his mother, in order not to give her the pain of knowing that her son was the laughing-stock of his companions: they derided him, and he held his peace and wept, with his head laid against the bench.
But one morning Garrone jumped up and said, "The first person who touches Nelli will get such a box on the ear from me that he will spin round three times!"
Franti paid no attention to him; the box on the ear was delivered: the fellow spun round three times, and from that time forth no one ever touched Nelli again.
The master placed Garrone near him, on the same bench.
They have become friends.
Nelli has grown very fond of Garrone.
As soon as he enters the schoolroom he looks to see if Garrone is there.
He never goes away without saying, "Good by, Garrone," and Garrone does the same with him.
When Nelli drops a pen or a book under the bench, Garrone stoops quickly, to prevent his stooping and tiring himself, and hands him his book or his pen, and then he helps him to put his things in his bag and to twist himself into his coat.
For this Nelli loves him, and gazes at him constantly; and when the master praises Garrone he is pleased, as though he had been praised himself.
Nelli must at last have told his mother all about the ridicule of the early days, and what they made him suffer; and about the comrade who defended him, and how he had grown fond of the latter; for this is what happened this morning.
The master had sent me to carry to the director, half an hour before the close of school, a programme of the lesson, and I entered the office at the same moment with a small blond woman dressed in black, the mother of Nelli, who said, "Signor Director, is there in the class with my son a boy named Garrone?"
"Yes," replied the head-master.
"Will you have the goodness to let him come here for a moment, as I have a word to say to him?"
The head-master called the beadle and sent him to the school, and after a minute Garrone appeared on the threshold, with his big, close-cropped head, in perfect amazement.
No sooner did she catch sight of him than the woman flew to meet him, threw her arms on his shoulders, and kissed him a great many times on the head, saying:-
"You are Garrone, the friend of my little son, the protector of my poor child; it is you, my dear, brave boy; it is you!"
Then she searched hastily in all her pockets, and in her purse, and finding nothing, she detached a chain from her neck, with a small cross, and put it on Garrone's neck, underneath his necktie, and said to him:-
"Take it!
wear it in memory of me, my dear boy; in memory of Nelli's mother, who thanks and blesses you."
Friday, 25th.
Garrone attracts the love of all; Derossi, the admiration.
He has taken the first medal; he will always be the first, and this year also; no one can compete with him; all recognize his superiority in all points.
He is the first in arithmetic, in grammar, in composition, in drawing; he understands everything on the instant; he has a marvellous memory; he succeeds in everything without effort; it seems as though study were play to him.
The teacher said to him yesterday:-
"You have received great gifts from God; all you have to do is not to squander them."
He is, moreover, tall and handsome, with a great crown of golden curls; he is so nimble that he can leap over a bench by resting one hand on it; and he already understands fencing.
He is twelve years old, and the son of a merchant; he is always dressed in blue, with gilt buttons; he is always lively, merry, gracious to all, and helps all he can in examinations; and no one has ever dared to do anything disagreeable to him, or to say a rough word to him.
Nobis and Franti alone look askance at him, and Votini darts envy from his eyes; but he does not even perceive it.
All smile at him, and take his hand or his arm, when he goes about, in his graceful way, to collect the work.
He gives away illustrated papers, drawings, everything that is given him at home; he has made a little geographical chart of Calabria for the Calabrian lad; and he gives everything with a smile, without paying any heed to it, like a grand gentleman, and without favoritism for any one.
It is impossible not to envy him, not to feel smaller than he in everything.
Ah!
I, too, envy him, like Votini.
And I feel a bitterness, almost a certain scorn, for him, sometimes, when I am striving to accomplish my work at home, and think that he has already finished his, at this same moment, extremely well, and without fatigue.
But then, when I return to school, and behold him so handsome, so smiling and triumphant, and hear how frankly and confidently he replies to the master's questions, and how courteous he is, and how the others all like him, then all bitterness, all scorn, departs from my heart, and I am ashamed of having experienced these sentiments.
I should like to be always near him at such times; I should like to be able to do all my school tasks with him: his presence, his voice, inspire me with courage, with a will to work, with cheerfulness and pleasure.
The teacher has given him the monthly story, which will be read to-morrow, to copy,- The Little Vidette of Lombardy.
He copied it this morning, and was so much affected by that heroic deed, that his face was all aflame, his eyes humid, and his lips trembling; and I gazed at him: how handsome and noble he was!
With what pleasure would I not have said frankly to his face: "Derossi, you are worth more than I in everything!
You are a man in comparison with me!
I respect you and I admire you!"
(Monthly Story.)
Saturday, 26th.
In 1859, during the war for the liberation of Lombardy, a few days after the battle of Solfarino and San Martino, won by the French and Italians over the Austrians, on a beautiful morning in the month of June, a little band of cavalry of Saluzzo was proceeding at a slow pace along a retired path, in the direction of the enemy, and exploring the country attentively.
The troop was commanded by an officer and a sergeant, and all were gazing into the distance ahead of them, with eyes fixed, silent, and prepared at any moment to see the uniforms of the enemy's advance-posts gleam white before them through the trees.
In this order they arrived at a rustic cabin, surrounded by ash-trees, in front of which stood a solitary boy, about twelve years old, who was removing the bark from a small branch with a knife, in order to make himself a stick of it.
From one window of the little house floated a large tricolored flag; there was no one inside: the peasants had fled, after hanging out the flag, for fear of the Austrians.
As soon as the lad saw the cavalry, he flung aside his stick and raised his cap.
He was a handsome boy, with a bold face and large blue eyes and long golden hair: he was in his shirt-sleeves and his breast was bare.
"What are you doing here?"
the officer asked him, reining in his horse.
"Why did you not flee with your family?"
"I have no family," replied the boy.
"I am a foundling.
I do a little work for everybody.
I remained here to see the war."
"Have you seen any Austrians pass?"
"No; not for these three days."
The officer paused a while in thought; then he leaped from his horse, and leaving his soldiers there, with their faces turned towards the foe, he entered the house and mounted to the roof.
The house was low; from the roof only a small tract of country was visible.
"It will be necessary to climb the trees," said the officer, and descended.
Just in front of the garden plot rose a very lofty and slender ash-tree, which was rocking its crest in the azure.
The officer stood a brief space in thought, gazing now at the tree, and again at the soldiers; then, all of a sudden, he asked the lad:-
"Is your sight good, you monkey?"
"Mine?"
replied the boy.
"I can spy a young sparrow a mile away."
"Are you good for a climb to the top of this tree?"
"To the top of this tree?
I?
I'll be up there in half a minute."
"And will you be able to tell me what you see up there-if there are Austrian soldiers in that direction, clouds of dust, gleaming guns, horses?"
"Certainly I shall."
"What do you demand for this service?"
"What do I demand?"
said the lad, smiling.
"Nothing.
A fine thing, indeed!
And then-if it were for the Germans, I wouldn't do it on any terms; but for our men!
I am a Lombard!"
"Good!
Then up with you."
"Wait a moment, until I take off my shoes."
He pulled off his shoes, tightened the girth of his trousers, flung his cap on the grass, and clasped the trunk of the ash.
"Take care, now!"
exclaimed the officer, making a movement to hold him back, as though seized with a sudden terror.
The boy turned to look at him, with his handsome blue eyes, as though interrogating him.
"No matter," said the officer; "up with you."
Up went the lad like a cat.
"Keep watch ahead!"
shouted the officer to the soldiers.
In a few moments the boy was at the top of the tree, twined around the trunk, with his legs among the leaves, but his body displayed to view, and the sun beating down on his blond head, which seemed to be of gold.
The officer could hardly see him, so small did he seem up there.
"Look straight ahead and far away!"
shouted the officer.
The lad, in order to see better, removed his right hand from the tree, and shaded his eyes with it.
"What do you see?"
asked the officer.
The boy inclined his head towards him, and making a speaking-trumpet of his hand, replied, "Two men on horseback, on the white road."
"At what distance from here?"
"Half a mile."
"Are they moving?"
"They are standing still."
"What else do you see?"
asked the officer, after a momentary silence.
"Look to the right."
The boy looked to the right.
Then he said: "Near the cemetery, among the trees, there is something glittering.
It seems to be bayonets."
"Do you see men?"
"No.
They must be concealed in the grain."
At that moment a sharp whiz of a bullet passed high up in the air, and died away in the distance, behind the house.
"Come down, my lad!"
shouted the officer.
"They have seen you.
I don't want anything more.
Come down."
"I'm not afraid," replied the boy.
"Come down!"
repeated the officer.
"What else do you see to the left?"
"To the left?"
"Yes, to the left."
The lad turned his head to the left: at that moment, another whistle, more acute and lower than the first, cut the air.
The boy was thoroughly aroused.
"Deuce take them!"
he exclaimed.
"They actually are aiming at me!"
The bullet had passed at a short distance from him.
"Down!"
shouted the officer, imperious and irritated.
"I'll come down presently," replied the boy.
"But the tree shelters me.
Don't fear.
You want to know what there is on the left?"
"Yes, on the left," answered the officer; "but come down."
"On the left," shouted the lad, thrusting his body out in that direction, "yonder, where there is a chapel, I think I see-"
A third fierce whistle passed through the air, and almost instantaneously the boy was seen to descend, catching for a moment at the trunk and branches, and then falling headlong with arms outspread.
"Curse it!"
exclaimed the officer, running up.
The boy landed on the ground, upon his back, and remained stretched out there, with arms outspread and supine; a stream of blood flowed from his breast, on the left.
The sergeant and two soldiers leaped from their horses; the officer bent over and opened his shirt: the ball had entered his left lung.
"He is dead!"
exclaimed the officer.
"No, he still lives!"
replied the sergeant.-"Ah, poor boy!
brave boy!"
cried the officer.
"Courage, courage!"
But while he was saying "courage," he was pressing his handkerchief on the wound.
The boy rolled his eyes wildly and dropped his head back.
He was dead.
The officer turned pale and stood for a moment gazing at him; then he laid him down carefully on his cloak upon the grass; then rose and stood looking at him; the sergeant and two soldiers also stood motionless, gazing upon him: the rest were facing in the direction of the enemy.
"Poor boy!"
repeated the officer.
"Poor, brave boy!"
Then he approached the house, removed the tricolor from the window, and spread it in guise of a funeral pall over the little dead boy, leaving his face uncovered.
The sergeant collected the dead boy's shoes, cap, his little stick, and his knife, and placed them beside him.
They stood for a few moments longer in silence; then the officer turned to the sergeant and said to him, "We will send the ambulance for him: he died as a soldier; the soldiers shall bury him."
Having said this, he wafted a kiss with his hand to the dead boy, and shouted "To horse!"
All sprang into the saddle, the troop drew together and resumed its road.
And a few hours later the little dead boy received the honors of war.
At sunset the whole line of the Italian advance-posts marched forward towards the foe, and along the same road which had been traversed in the morning by the detachment of cavalry, there proceeded, in two files, a heavy battalion of sharpshooters, who, a few days before, had valiantly watered the hill of San Martino with blood.
The news of the boy's death had already spread among the soldiers before they left the encampment.
The path, flanked by a rivulet, ran a few paces distant from the house.
When the first officers of the battalion caught sight of the little body stretched at the foot of the ash-tree and covered with the tricolored banner, they made the salute to it with their swords, and one of them bent over the bank of the streamlet, which was covered with flowers at that spot, plucked a couple of blossoms and threw them on it.
Then all the sharpshooters, as they passed, plucked flowers and threw them on the body.
In a few minutes the boy was covered with flowers, and officers and soldiers all saluted him as they passed by: "Bravo, little Lombard!"
"Farewell, my lad!"
"I salute thee, gold locks!"
"Hurrah!"
"Glory!"
"Farewell!"
One officer tossed him his medal for valor; another went and kissed his brow.
And flowers continued to rain down on his bare feet, on his blood-stained breast, on his golden head.
And there he lay asleep on the grass, enveloped in his flag, with a white and almost smiling face, poor boy!
as though he heard these salutes and was glad that he had given his life for his Lombardy.
Tuesday, 29th.
To give one's life for one's country as the Lombard boy did, is a great virtue; but you must not neglect the lesser virtues, my son.
This morning as you walked in front of me, when we were returning from school, you passed near a poor woman who was holding between her knees a thin, pale child, and who asked alms of you.
You looked at her and gave her nothing, and yet you had some coppers in your pocket.
Listen, my son.
Do not accustom yourself to pass indifferently before misery which stretches out its hand to you and far less before a mother who asks a copper for her child.
Reflect that the child may be hungry; think of the agony of that poor woman.
Picture to yourself the sob of despair of your mother, if she were some day forced to say, "Enrico, I cannot give you any bread even to-day!"
When I give a soldo to a beggar, and he says to me, "God preserve your health, and the health of all belonging to you!"
you cannot understand the sweetness which these words produce in my heart, the gratitude that I feel for that poor man.
It seems to me certain that such a good wish must keep one in good health for a long time, and I return home content, and think, "Oh, that poor man has returned to me very much more than I gave him!"
Well, let me sometimes feel that good wish called forth, merited by you; draw a soldo from your little purse now and then, and let it fall into the hand of a blind man without means of subsistence, of a mother without bread, of a child without a mother.
The poor love the alms of boys, because it does not humiliate them, and because boys, who stand in need of everything, resemble themselves: you see that there are always poor people around the schoolhouses.
The alms of a man is an act of charity; but that of a child is at one and the same time an act of charity and a caress-do you understand?
It is as though a soldo and a flower fell from your hand together.
Reflect that you lack nothing, and that they lack everything, that while you aspire to be happy, they are content simply with not dying.
Reflect, that it is a horror, in the midst of so many palaces, along the streets thronged with carriages, and children clad in velvet, that there should be women and children who have nothing to eat.
To have nothing to eat!
O God!
Boys like you, as good as you, as intelligent as you, who, in the midst of a great city, have nothing to eat, like wild beasts lost in a desert!
Oh, never again, Enrico, pass a mother who is begging, without placing a soldo in her hand!
THY FATHER.
Thursday, 1st.
MY father wishes me to have some one of my companions come to the house every holiday, or that I should go to see one of them, in order that I may gradually become friends with all of them.
Sunday I shall go to walk with Votini, the well-dressed boy who is always polishing himself up, and who is so envious of Derossi.
In the meantime, Garoffi came to the house to-day,-that long, lank boy, with the nose like an owl's beak, and small, knavish eyes, which seem to be ferreting everywhere.
He is the son of a grocer; he is an eccentric fellow; he is always counting the soldi that he has in his pocket; he reckons them on his fingers very, very rapidly, and goes through some process of multiplication without any tables; and he hoards his money, and already has a book in the Scholars' Savings Bank.
He never spends a soldo, I am positive; and if he drops a centesimo under the benches, he is capable of hunting for it for a week.
He does as magpies do, so Derossi says.
Everything that he finds-worn-out pens, postage-stamps that have been used, pins, candle-ends-he picks up.
He has been collecting postage-stamps for more than two years now; and he already has hundreds of them from every country, in a large album, which he will sell to a bookseller later on, when he has got it quite full.
Meanwhile, the bookseller gives him his copy-books gratis, because he takes a great many boys to the shop.
In school, he is always bartering; he effects sales of little articles every day, and lotteries and exchanges; then he regrets the exchange, and wants his stuff back; he buys for two and gets rid of it for four; he plays at pitch-penny, and never loses; he sells old newspapers over again to the tobacconist; and he keeps a little blank-book, in which he sets down his transactions, which is completely filled with sums and subtractions.
At school he studies nothing but arithmetic; and if he desires the medal, it is only that he may have a free entrance into the puppet-show.
But he pleases me; he amuses me.
We played at keeping a market, with weights and scales.
He knows the exact price of everything; he understands weighing, and makes handsome paper horns, like shopkeepers, with great expedition.
He declares that as soon as he has finished school he shall set up in business-in a new business which he has invented himself.
He was very much pleased when I gave him some foreign postage-stamps; and he informed me exactly how each one sold for collections.
My father pretended to be reading the newspaper; but he listened to him, and was greatly diverted.
His pockets are bulging, full of his little wares; and he covers them up with a long black cloak, and always appears thoughtful and preoccupied with business, like a merchant.
But the thing that he has nearest his heart is his collection of postage-stamps.
This is his treasure; and he always speaks of it as though he were going to get a fortune out of it.
His companions accuse him of miserliness and usury.
I do not know: I like him; he teaches me a great many things; he seems a man to me.
Coretti, the son of the wood-merchant, says that he would not give him his postage-stamps to save his mother's life.
My father does not believe it.
"Wait a little before you condemn him," he said to me; "he has this passion, but he has heart as well."
Monday, 5th.
Yesterday I went to take a walk along the Rivoli road with Votini and his father.
As we were passing through the Via Dora Grossa we saw Stardi, the boy who kicks disturbers, standing stiffly in front of the window of a book-shop, with his eyes fixed on a geographical map; and no one knows how long he had been there, because he studies even in the street.
He barely returned our salute, the rude fellow!
Votini was well dressed-even too much so.
He had on morocco boots embroidered in red, an embroidered coat, small silken frogs, a white beaver hat, and a watch; and he strutted.
But his vanity was destined to come to a bad end on this occasion.
After having run a tolerably long distance up the Rivoli road, leaving his father, who was walking slowly, a long way in the rear, we halted at a stone seat, beside a modestly clad boy, who appeared to be weary, and was meditating, with drooping head.
A man, who must have been his father, was walking to and fro under the trees, reading the newspaper.
We sat down.
Votini placed himself between me and the boy.
All at once he recollected that he was well dressed, and wanted to make his neighbor admire and envy him.
He lifted one foot, and said to me, "Have you seen my officer's boots?"
He said this in order to make the other boy look at them; but the latter paid no attention to them.
Then he dropped his foot, and showed me his silk frogs, glancing askance at the boy the while, and said that these frogs did not please him, and that he wanted to have them changed to silver buttons; but the boy did not look at the frogs either.
Then Votini fell to twirling his very handsome white castor hat on the tip of his forefinger; but the boy-and it seemed as though he did it on purpose-did not deign even a glance at the hat.
Votini, who began to become irritated, drew out his watch, opened it, and showed me the wheels; but the boy did not turn his head.
"Is it of silver gilt?"
I asked him.
"No," he replied; "it is gold."
"But not entirely of gold," I said; "there must be some silver with it."
"Why, no!"
he retorted; and, in order to compel the boy to look, he held the watch before his face, and said to him, "Say, look here!
isn't it true that it is entirely of gold?"
The boy replied curtly, "I don't know."
"Oh!
oh!"
exclaimed Votini, full of wrath, "what pride!"
As he was saying this, his father came up, and heard him; he looked steadily at the lad for a moment, then said sharply to his son, "Hold your tongue!"
and, bending down to his ear, he added, "he is blind!"
Votini sprang to his feet, with a shudder, and stared the boy in the face: the latter's eyeballs were glassy, without expression, without sight.
Votini stood humbled,-speechless,-with his eyes fixed on the ground.
At length he stammered, "I am sorry; I did not know."
But the blind boy, who had understood it all, said, with a kind and melancholy smile, "Oh, it's no matter!"
Well, he is vain; but Votini has not at all a bad heart.
He never laughed again during the whole of the walk.
Saturday, 10th.
Farewell, walks to Rivoli!
Here is the beautiful friend of the boys!
Here is the first snow!
Ever since yesterday evening it has been falling in thick flakes as large as gillyflowers.
It was a pleasure this morning at school to see it beat against the panes and pile up on the window-sills; even the master watched it, and rubbed his hands; and all were glad, when they thought of making snowballs, and of the ice which will come later, and of the hearth at home.
Stardi, entirely absorbed in his lessons, and with his fists pressed to his temples, was the only one who paid no attention to it.
What beauty, what a celebration there was when we left school!
All danced down the streets, shouting and tossing their arms, catching up handfuls of snow, and dashing about in it, like poodles in water.
The umbrellas of the parents, who were waiting for them outside, were all white; the policeman's helmet was white; all our satchels were white in a few moments.
Every one appeared to be beside himself with joy-even Precossi, the son of the blacksmith, that pale boy who never laughs; and Robetti, the lad who saved the little child from the omnibus, poor fellow!
he jumped about on his crutches.
The Calabrian, who had never touched snow, made himself a little ball of it, and began to eat it, as though it had been a peach; Crossi, the son of the vegetable-vendor, filled his satchel with it; and the little mason made us burst with laughter, when my father invited him to come to our house to-morrow.
He had his mouth full of snow, and, not daring either to spit it out or to swallow it, he stood there choking and staring at us, and made no answer.
Even the schoolmistress came out of school on a run, laughing; and my mistress of the first upper class, poor little thing!
ran through the drizzling snow, covering her face with her green veil, and coughing; and meanwhile, hundreds of girls from the neighboring schoolhouse passed by, screaming and frolicking on that white carpet; and the masters and the beadles and the policemen shouted, "Home!
home!"
swallowing flakes of snow, and whitening their moustaches and beards.
But they, too, laughed at this wild hilarity of the scholars, as they celebrated the winter.
You hail the arrival of winter; but there are boys who have neither clothes nor shoes nor fire.
There are thousands of them, who descend to their villages, over a long road, carrying in hands bleeding from chilblains a bit of wood to warm the schoolroom.
There are hundreds of schools almost buried in the snow, bare and dismal as caves, where the boys suffocate with smoke or chatter their teeth with cold as they gaze in terror at the white flakes which descend unceasingly, which pile up without cessation on their distant cabins threatened by avalanches.
You rejoice in the winter, boys.
Think of the thousands of creatures to whom winter brings misery and death.
THY FATHER.
Sunday, 11th.
The little mason came to-day, in a hunting-jacket, entirely dressed in the cast-off clothes of his father, which were still white with lime and plaster.
My father was even more anxious than I that he should come.
How much pleasure he gives us!
No sooner had he entered than he pulled off his ragged cap, which was all soaked with snow, and thrust it into one of his pockets; then he advanced with his listless gait, like a weary workman, turning his face, as smooth as an apple, with its ball-like nose, from side to side; and when he entered the dining-room, he cast a glance round at the furniture and fixed his eyes on a small picture of Rigoletto, a hunchbacked jester, and made a "hare's face."
It is impossible to refrain from laughing when one sees him make that hare's face.
We went to playing with bits of wood: he possesses an extraordinary skill at making towers and bridges, which seem to stand as though by a miracle, and he works at it quite seriously, with the patience of a man.
Between one tower and another he told me about his family: they live in a garret; his father goes to the evening school to learn to read, and his mother is a washerwoman.
And they must love him, of course, for he is clad like a poor boy, but he is well protected from the cold, with neatly mended clothes, and with his necktie nicely tied by his mother's hands.
His father, he told me, is a fine man,-a giant, who has trouble in getting through doors, but he is kind, and always calls his son "hare's face": the son, on the contrary, is rather small.
At four o'clock we lunched on bread and goat's-milk cheese, as we sat on the sofa; and when we rose, I do not know why, but my father did not wish me to brush off the back, which the little mason had spotted with white, from his jacket: he restrained my hand, and then rubbed it off himself on the sly.
While we were playing, the little mason lost a button from his hunting-jacket, and my mother sewed it on, and he grew quite red, and began to watch her sew, in perfect amazement and confusion, holding his breath the while.
Then we gave him some albums of caricatures to look at, and he, without being aware of it himself, imitated the grimaces of the faces there so well, that even my father laughed.
He was so much pleased when he went away that he forgot to put on his tattered cap; and when we reached the landing, he made a hare's face at me once more in sign of his gratitude.
His name is Antonio Rabucco, and he is eight years and eight months old.
Do you know, my son, why I did not wish you to wipe off the sofa?
Because to wipe it while your companion was looking on would have been almost the same as administering a reproof to him for having soiled it.
And this was not well, in the first place, because he did not do it intentionally, and in the next, because he did it with the clothes of his father, who had covered them with plaster while at work; and what is contracted while at work is not dirt; it is dust, lime, varnish, whatever you like, but it is not dirt.
Labor does not engender dirt.
Never say of a laborer coming from his work, "He is filthy."
You should say, "He has on his garments the signs, the traces, of his toil."
Remember this.
And you must love the little mason, first, because he is your comrade; and next, because he is the son of a workingman.
THY FATHER.
Friday, 16th.
It is still snow, snow.
A shameful thing happened in connection with the snow this morning when we came out of school.
A flock of boys had no sooner got into the Corso than they began to throw balls of that watery snow which makes missiles as solid and heavy as stones.
Many persons were passing along the sidewalks.
A gentleman called out, "Stop that, you little rascals!"
and just at that moment a sharp cry rose from another part of the street, and we saw an old man who had lost his hat and was staggering about, covering his face with his hands, and beside him a boy who was shouting, "Help!
help!"
People instantly ran from all directions.
He had been struck in the eye with a ball.
All the boys dispersed, fleeing like arrows.
I was standing in front of the bookseller's shop, into which my father had gone, and I saw several of my companions approaching at a run, mingling with others near me, and pretending to be engaged in staring at the windows: there was Garrone, with his penny roll in his pocket, as usual; Coretti, the little mason; and Garoffi, the boy with the postage-stamps.
In the meantime a crowd had formed around the old man, and a policeman and others were running to and fro, threatening and demanding: "Who was it?
Who did it?
Was it you?
Tell me who did it!"
and they looked at the boys' hands to see whether they were wet with snow.
Garoffi was standing beside me.
I perceived that he was trembling all over, and that his face was as white as that of a corpse.
"Who was it?
Who did it?"
the crowd continued to cry.
Then I overheard Garrone say in a low voice to Garoffi, "Come, go and present yourself; it would be cowardly to allow any one else to be arrested."
"But I did not do it on purpose," replied Garoffi, trembling like a leaf.
"No matter; do your duty," repeated Garrone.
"But I have not the courage."
"Take courage, then; I will accompany you."
And the policeman and the other people were crying more loudly than ever: "Who was it?
Who did it?
One of his glasses has been driven into his eye!
He has been blinded!
The ruffians!"
I thought that Garoffi would fall to the earth.
"Come," said Garrone, resolutely, "I will defend you;" and grasping him by the arm, he thrust him forward, supporting him as though he had been a sick man.
The people saw, and instantly understood, and several persons ran up with their fists raised; but Garrone thrust himself between, crying:-
"Do ten men of you set on one boy?"
Then they ceased, and a policeman seized Garoffi by the hand and led him, pushing aside the crowd as he went, to a pastry-cook's shop, where the wounded man had been carried.
On catching sight of him, I suddenly recognized him as the old employee who lives on the fourth floor of our house with his grandnephew.
He was stretched out on a chair, with a handkerchief over his eyes.
"I did not do it intentionally!"
sobbed Garoffi, half dead with terror; "I did not do it intentionally!"
Two or three persons thrust him violently into the shop, crying, "Your face to the earth!
Beg his pardon!"
and they threw him to the ground.
But all at once two vigorous arms set him on his feet again, and a resolute voice said:-
"No, gentlemen!"
It was our head-master, who had seen it all.
"Since he has had the courage to present himself," he added, "no one has the right to humiliate him."
All stood silent.
"Ask his forgiveness," said the head-master to Garoffi.
Garoffi, bursting into tears, embraced the old man's knees, and the latter, having felt for the boy's head with his hand, caressed his hair.
Then all said:-
"Go away, boy!
go, return home."
And my father drew me out of the crowd, and said to me as we passed along the street, "Enrico, would you have had the courage, under similar circumstances, to do your duty,-to go and confess your fault?"
I told him that I should.
And he said, "Give me your word, as a lad of heart and honor, that you would do it."
"I give thee my word, father mine!"
Saturday, 17th.
Garoffi was thoroughly terrified to-day, in the expectation of a severe punishment from the teacher; but the master did not make his appearance; and as the assistant was also missing, Signora Cromi, the oldest of the schoolmistresses, came to teach the school; she has two grown-up children, and she has taught several women to read and write, who now come to accompany their sons to the Baretti schoolhouse.
She was sad to-day, because one of her sons is ill. No sooner had they caught sight of her, than they began to make an uproar.
But she said, in a slow and tranquil tone, "Respect my white hair; I am not only a school-teacher, I am also a mother"; and then no one dared to speak again, in spite of that brazen face of Franti, who contented himself with jeering at her on the sly.
Signora Delcati, my brother's teacher, was sent to take charge of Signora Cromi's class, and to Signora Delcati's was sent the teacher who is called "the little nun," because she always dresses in dark colors, with a black apron, and has a small white face, hair that is always smooth, very bright eyes, and a delicate voice, that seems to be forever murmuring prayers.
And it is incomprehensible, my mother says; she is so gentle and timid, with that thread of a voice, which is always even, which is hardly audible, and she never speaks loud nor flies into a passion; but, nevertheless, she keeps the boys so quiet that you cannot hear them, and the most roguish bow their heads when she merely admonishes them with her finger, and her school seems like a church; and it is for this reason, also, that she is called "the little nun."
But there is another one who pleases me,-the young mistress of the first lower, No.
3, that young girl with the rosy face, who has two pretty dimples in her cheeks, and who wears a large red feather on her little bonnet, and a small cross of yellow glass on her neck.
She is always cheerful, and keeps her class cheerful; she is always calling out with that silvery voice of hers, which makes her seem to be singing, and tapping her little rod on the table, and clapping her hands to impose silence; then, when they come out of school, she runs after one and another like a child, to bring them back into line: she pulls up the cape of one, and buttons the coat of another, so that they may not take cold; she follows them even into the street, in order that they may not fall to quarrelling; she beseeches the parents not to whip them at home; she brings lozenges to those who have coughs; she lends her muff to those who are cold; and she is continually tormented by the smallest children, who caress her and demand kisses, and pull at her veil and her mantle; but she lets them do it, and kisses them all with a smile, and returns home all rumpled and with her throat all bare, panting and happy, with her beautiful dimples and her red feather.
She is also the girls' drawing-teacher, and she supports her mother and a brother by her own labor.
Sunday, 18th.
The grandnephew of the old employee who was struck in the eye by Garoffi's snowball is with the schoolmistress who has the red feather: we saw him to-day in the house of his uncle, who treats him like a son.
I had finished writing out the monthly story for the coming week,- The Little Florentine Scribe,-which the master had given to me to copy; and my father said to me:-
"Let us go up to the fourth floor, and see how that old gentleman's eye is."
We entered a room which was almost dark, where the old man was sitting up in bed, with a great many pillows behind his shoulders; by the bedside sat his wife, and in one corner his nephew was amusing himself.
The old man's eye was bandaged.
He was very glad to see my father; he made us sit down, and said that he was better, that his eye was not only not ruined, but that he should be quite well again in a few days.
"It was an accident," he added.
"I regret the terror which it must have caused that poor boy."
Then he talked to us about the doctor, whom he expected every moment to attend him.
Just then the door-bell rang.
"There is the doctor," said his wife.
The door opened-and whom did I see?
Garoffi, in his long cloak, standing, with bowed head, on the threshold, and without the courage to enter.
"Who is it?"
asked the sick man.
"It is the boy who threw the snowball," said my father.
And then the old man said:-
"Oh, my poor boy!
come here; you have come to inquire after the wounded man, have you not?
But he is better; be at ease; he is better and almost well.
Come here."
Garoffi, who did not perceive us in his confusion, approached the bed, forcing himself not to cry; and the old man caressed him, but could not speak.
"Thanks," said the old man; "go and tell your father and mother that all is going well, and that they are not to think any more about it."
But Garoffi did not move, and seemed to have something to say which he dared not utter.
"What have you to say to me?
What is it that you want?"
"I!-Nothing."
"Well, good by, until we meet again, my boy; go with your heart in peace."
Garoffi went as far as the door; but there he halted, turned to the nephew, who was following him, and gazed curiously at him.
All at once he pulled some object from beneath his cloak, put it in the boy's hand, and whispered hastily to him, "It is for you," and away he went like a flash.
The boy carried the object to his uncle; we saw that on it was written, I give you this; we looked inside, and uttered an exclamation of surprise.
It was the famous album, with his collection of postage-stamps, which poor Garoffi had brought, the collection of which he was always talking, upon which he had founded so many hopes, and which had cost him so much trouble; it was his treasure, poor boy!
it was the half of his very blood, which he had presented in exchange for his pardon.
(Monthly Story.)
He was in the fourth elementary class.
He was a graceful Florentine lad of twelve, with black hair and a white face, the eldest son of an employee on the railway, who, having a large family and but small pay, lived in straitened circumstances.
His father loved him and was tolerably kind and indulgent to him-indulgent in everything except in that which referred to school: on this point he required a great deal, and showed himself severe, because his son was obliged to attain such a rank as would enable him to soon obtain a place and help his family; and in order to accomplish anything quickly, it was necessary that he should work a great deal in a very short time.
And although the lad studied, his father was always exhorting him to study more.
His father was advanced in years, and too much toil had aged him before his time.
Nevertheless, in order to provide for the necessities of his family, in addition to the toil which his occupation imposed upon him, he obtained special work here and there as a copyist, and passed a good part of the night at his writing-table.
Lately, he had undertaken, in behalf of a house which published journals and books in parts, to write upon the parcels the names and addresses of their subscribers, and he earned three lire{1} for every five hundred of these paper wrappers, written in large and regular characters.
But this work wearied him, and he often complained of it to his family at dinner.
{1} Sixty cents.
"My eyes are giving out," he said; "this night work is killing me."
One day his son said to him, "Let me work instead of you, papa; you know that I can write like you, and fairly well."
But the father answered:-
"No, my son, you must study; your school is a much more important thing than my wrappers; I feel remorse at robbing you of a single hour; I thank you, but I will not have it; do not mention it to me again."
The son knew that it was useless to insist on such a matter with his father, and he did not persist; but this is what he did.
He knew that exactly at midnight his father stopped writing, and quitted his workroom to go to his bedroom; he had heard him several times: as soon as the twelve strokes of the clock had sounded, he had heard the sound of a chair drawn back, and the slow step of his father.
One night he waited until the latter was in bed, then dressed himself very, very softly, and felt his way to the little workroom, lighted the petroleum lamp again, seated himself at the writing-table, where lay a pile of white wrappers and the list of addresses, and began to write, imitating exactly his father's handwriting.
And he wrote with a will, gladly, a little in fear, and the wrappers piled up, and from time to time he dropped the pen to rub his hands, and then began again with increased alacrity, listening and smiling.
He wrote a hundred and sixty-one lira!
Then he stopped, placed the pen where he had found it, extinguished the light, and went back to bed on tiptoe.
At noon that day his father sat down to the table in a good humor.
He had perceived nothing.
He performed the work mechanically, measuring it by the hour, and thinking of something else, and only counted the wrappers he had written on the following day.
He seated himself at the table in a fine humor, and slapping his son on one shoulder, he said to him:-
"Eh, Giulio!
Your father is even a better workman than you thought.
In two hours I did a good third more work than usual last night.
My hand is still nimble, and my eyes still do their duty."
And Giulio, silent but content, said to himself, "Poor daddy, besides the money, I am giving him some satisfaction in the thought that he has grown young again.
Well, courage!"
Encouraged by these good results, when night came and twelve o'clock struck, he rose once more, and set to work.
And this he did for several nights.
And his father noticed nothing; only once, at supper, he uttered this exclamation, "It is strange how much oil has been used in this house lately!"
This was a shock to Giulio; but the conversation ceased there, and the nocturnal labor proceeded.
However, by dint of thus breaking his sleep every night, Giulio did not get sufficient rest: he rose in the morning fatigued, and when he was doing his school work in the evening, he had difficulty in keeping his eyes open.
One evening, for the first time in his life, he fell asleep over his copy-book.
"Courage!
courage!"
cried his father, clapping his hands; "to work!"
He shook himself and set to work again.
But the next evening, and on the days following, the same thing occurred, and worse: he dozed over his books, he rose later than usual, he studied his lessons in a languid way, he seemed disgusted with study.
His father began to observe him, then to reflect seriously, and at last to reprove him.
He should never have done it!
"Giulio," he said to him one morning, "you put me quite beside myself; you are no longer as you used to be.
I don't like it.
Take care; all the hopes of your family rest on you.
I am dissatisfied; do you understand?"
At this reproof, the first severe one, in truth, which he had ever received, the boy grew troubled.
"Yes," he said to himself, "it is true; it cannot go on so; this deceit must come to an end."
But at dinner, on the evening of that very same day, his father said with much cheerfulness, "Do you know that this month I have earned thirty-two lire more at addressing those wrappers than last month!"
and so saying, he drew from under the table a paper package of sweets which he had bought, that he might celebrate with his children this extraordinary profit, and they all hailed it with clapping of hands.
Then Giulio took heart again, courage again, and said in his heart, "No, poor papa, I will not cease to deceive you; I will make greater efforts to work during the day, but I shall continue to work at night for you and for the rest."
And his father added, "Thirty-two lire more!
I am satisfied.
But that boy there," pointing at Giulio, "is the one who displeases me."
And Giulio received the reprimand in silence, forcing back two tears which tried to flow; but at the same time he felt a great pleasure in his heart.
And he continued to work by main force; but fatigue added to fatigue rendered it ever more difficult for him to resist.
Thus things went on for two months.
The father continued to reproach his son, and to gaze at him with eyes which grew constantly more wrathful.
One day he went to make inquiries of the teacher, and the teacher said to him: "Yes, he gets along, he gets along, because he is intelligent; but he no longer has the good will which he had at first.
He is drowsy, he yawns, his mind is distracted.
He writes short compositions, scribbled down in all haste, in bad chirography.
Oh, he could do a great deal, a great deal more."
That evening the father took the son aside, and spoke to him words which were graver than any the latter had ever heard.
"Giulio, you see how I toil, how I am wearing out my life, for the family.
You do not second my efforts.
You have no heart for me, nor for your brothers, nor for your mother!"
"Ah no!
don't say that, father!"
cried the son, bursting into tears, and opening his mouth to confess all.
But his father interrupted him, saying:-
"You are aware of the condition of the family; you know that good will and sacrifices on the part of all are necessary.
I myself, as you see, have had to double my work.
I counted on a gift of a hundred lire from the railway company this month, and this morning I have learned that I shall receive nothing!"
At this information, Giulio repressed the confession which was on the point of escaping from his soul, and repeated resolutely to himself: "No, papa, I shall tell you nothing; I shall guard my secret for the sake of being able to work for you; I will recompense you in another way for the sorrow which I occasion you; I will study enough at school to win promotion; the important point is to help you to earn our living, and to relieve you of the fatigue which is killing you."
And so he went on, and two months more passed, of labor by night and weakness by day, of desperate efforts on the part of the son, and of bitter reproaches on the part of the father.
But the worst of it was, that the latter grew gradually colder towards the boy, only addressed him rarely, as though he had been a recreant son, of whom there was nothing any longer to be expected, and almost avoided meeting his glance.
And Giulio perceived this and suffered from it, and when his father's back was turned, he threw him a furtive kiss, stretching forth his face with a sentiment of sad and dutiful tenderness; and between sorrow and fatigue, he grew thin and pale, and he was constrained to still further neglect his studies.
And he understood well that there must be an end to it some day, and every evening he said to himself, "I will not get up to-night"; but when the clock struck twelve, at the moment when he should have vigorously reaffirmed his resolution, he felt remorse: it seemed to him, that by remaining in bed he should be failing in a duty, and robbing his father and the family of a lira.
And he rose, thinking that some night his father would wake up and discover him, or that he would discover the deception by accident, by counting the wrappers twice; and then all would come to a natural end, without any act of his will, which he did not feel the courage to exert.
And thus he went on.
But one evening at dinner his father spoke a word which was decisive so far as he was concerned.
His mother looked at him, and as it seemed to her that he was more ill and weak than usual, she said to him, "Giulio, you are ill." And then, turning to his father with anxiety: "Giulio is ill. See how pale he is Giulio, my dear, how do you feel?"
His father gave a hasty glance, and said: "It is his bad conscience that produces his bad health.
He was not thus when he was a studious scholar and a loving son."
"But he is ill!"
exclaimed the mother.
"I don't care anything about him any longer!"
replied the father.
This remark was like a stab in the heart to the poor boy.
Ah!
he cared nothing any more.
His father, who once trembled at the mere sound of a cough from him!
He no longer loved him; there was no longer any doubt; he was dead in his father's heart.
"Ah, no!
my father," said the boy to himself, his heart oppressed with anguish, "now all is over indeed; I cannot live without your affection; I must have it all back.
I will tell you all; I will deceive you no longer.
I will study as of old, come what will, if you will only love me once more, my poor father!
Oh, this time I am quite sure of my resolution!"
Nevertheless he rose that night again, by force of habit more than anything else; and when he was once up, he wanted to go and salute and see once more, for the last time, in the quiet of the night, that little chamber where he toiled so much in secret with his heart full of satisfaction and tenderness.
And when he beheld again that little table with the lamp lighted and those white wrappers on which he was never more to write those names of towns and persons, which he had come to know by heart, he was seized with a great sadness, and with an impetuous movement he grasped the pen to recommence his accustomed toil.
But in reaching out his hand he struck a book, and the book fell.
The blood rushed to his heart.
What if his father had waked!
Certainly he would not have discovered him in the commission of a bad deed: he had himself decided to tell him all, and yet-the sound of that step approaching in the darkness,-the discovery at that hour, in that silence,-his mother, who would be awakened and alarmed,-and the thought, which had occurred to him for the first time, that his father might feel humiliated in his presence on thus discovering all;-all this terrified him almost.
He bent his ear, with suspended breath.
He heard no sound.
He laid his ear to the lock of the door behind him-nothing.
The whole house was asleep.
His father had not heard.
He recovered his composure, and he set himself again to his writing, and wrapper was piled on wrapper.
He heard the regular tread of the policeman below in the deserted street; then the rumble of a carriage which gradually died away; then, after an interval, the rattle of a file of carts, which passed slowly by; then a profound silence, broken from time to time by the distant barking of a dog.
And he wrote on and on: and meanwhile his father was behind him.
He had risen on hearing the fall of the book, and had remained waiting for a long time: the rattle of the carts had drowned the noise of his footsteps and the creaking of the door-casing; and he was there, with his white head bent over Giulio's little black head, and he had seen the pen flying over the wrappers, and in an instant he had divined all, remembered all, understood all, and a despairing penitence, but at the same time an immense tenderness, had taken possession of his mind and had held him nailed to the spot suffocating behind his child.
Suddenly Giulio uttered a piercing shriek: two arms had pressed his head convulsively.
"Oh, papa, papa!
forgive me, forgive me!"
he cried, recognizing his parent by his weeping.
"Do you forgive me!"
replied his father, sobbing, and covering his brow with kisses.
"I have understood all, I know all; it is I, it is I who ask your pardon, my blessed little creature; come, come with me!"
and he pushed or rather carried him to the bedside of his mother, who was awake, and throwing him into her arms, he said:-
"Kiss this little angel of a son, who has not slept for three months, but has been toiling for me, while I was saddening his heart, and he was earning our bread!"
The mother pressed him to her breast and held him there, without the power to speak; at last she said: "Go to sleep at once, my baby, go to sleep and rest.-Carry him to bed."
The father took him from her arms, carried him to his room, and laid him in his bed, still breathing hard and caressing him, and arranged his pillows and coverlets for him.
"Thanks, papa," the child kept repeating; "thanks; but go to bed yourself now; I am content; go to bed, papa."
But his father wanted to see him fall asleep; so he sat down beside the bed, took his hand, and said to him, "Sleep, sleep, my little son!"
and Giulio, being weak, fell asleep at last, and slumbered many hours, enjoying, for the first time in many months, a tranquil sleep, enlivened by pleasant dreams; and as he opened his eyes, when the sun had already been shining for a tolerably long time, he first felt, and then saw, close to his breast, and resting upon the edge of the little bed, the white head of his father, who had passed the night thus, and who was still asleep, with his brow against his son's heart.
Wednesday, 28th.
There is Stardi in my school, who would have the force to do what the little Florentine did.
This morning two events occurred at the school: Garoffi, wild with delight, because his album had been returned to him, with the addition of three postage-stamps of the Republic of Guatemala, which he had been seeking for three months; and Stardi, who took the second medal; Stardi the next in the class after Derossi!
All were amazed at it.
Who could ever have foretold it, when, in October, his father brought him to school bundled up in that big green coat, and said to the master, in presence of every one:-
"You must have a great deal of patience with him, because he is very hard of understanding!"
Every one credited him with a wooden head from the very beginning.
But he said, "I will burst or I will succeed," and he set to work doggedly, to studying day and night, at home, at school, while walking, with set teeth and clenched fists, patient as an ox, obstinate as a mule; and thus, by dint of trampling on every one, disregarding mockery, and dealing kicks to disturbers, this big thick-head passed in advance of the rest.
He understood not the first thing of arithmetic, he filled his compositions with absurdities, he never succeeded in retaining a phrase in his mind; and now he solves problems, writes correctly, and sings his lessons like a song.
And his iron will can be divined from the seeing how he is made, so very thickset and squat, with a square head and no neck, with short, thick hands, and coarse voice.
He studies even on scraps of newspaper, and on theatre bills, and every time that he has ten soldi, he buys a book; he has already collected a little library, and in a moment of good humor he allowed the promise to slip from his mouth that he would take me home and show it to me.
He speaks to no one, he plays with no one, he is always on hand, on his bench, with his fists pressed to his temples, firm as a rock, listening to the teacher.
How he must have toiled, poor Stardi!
The master said to him this morning, although he was impatient and in a bad humor, when he bestowed the medals:-
"Bravo, Stardi!
he who endures, conquers."
But the latter did not appear in the least puffed up with pride-he did not smile; and no sooner had he returned to his seat, with the medal, than he planted his fists on his temples again, and became more motionless and more attentive than before.
But the finest thing happened when he went out of school; for his father, a blood-letter, as big and squat as himself, with a huge face and a huge voice, was there waiting for him.
He had not expected this medal, and he was not willing to believe in it, so that it was necessary for the master to reassure him, and then he began to laugh heartily, and tapped his son on the back of the neck, saying energetically, "Bravo!
good!
my dear pumpkin; you'll do!"
and he stared at him, astonished and smiling.
And all the boys around him smiled too, except Stardi.
He was already ruminating the lesson for to-morrow morning in that huge head of his.
Saturday, 31st.
Your comrade Stardi never complains of his teacher; I am sure of that.
"The master was in a bad temper, was impatient,"-you say it in a tone of resentment.
Think an instant how often you give way to acts of impatience, and towards whom?
towards your father and your mother, towards whom your impatience is a crime.
Your master has very good cause to be impatient at times!
Reflect that he has been laboring for boys these many years, and that if he has found many affectionate and noble individuals among them, he has also found many ungrateful ones, who have abused his kindness and ignored his toils; and that, between you all, you cause him far more bitterness than satisfaction.
Reflect, that the most holy man on earth, if placed in his position, would allow himself to be conquered by wrath now and then.
And then, if you only knew how often the teacher goes to give a lesson to a sick boy, all alone, because he is not ill enough to be excused from school and is impatient on account of his suffering, and is pained to see that the rest of you do not notice it, or abuse it!
Respect, love, your master, my son.
Love him, also, because your father loves and respects him; because he consecrates his life to the welfare of so many boys who will forget him; love him because he opens and enlightens your intelligence and educates your mind; because one of these days, when you have become a man, and when neither I nor he shall be in the world, his image will often present itself to your mind, side by side with mine, and then you will see certain expressions of sorrow and fatigue in his honest countenance to which you now pay no heed: you will recall them, and they will pain you, even after the lapse of thirty years; and you will feel ashamed, you will feel sad at not having loved him, at having behaved badly to him.
Love your master; for he belongs to that vast family of fifty thousand elementary instructors, scattered throughout all Italy, who are the intellectual fathers of the millions of boys who are growing up with you; the laborers, hardly recognized and poorly recompensed, who are preparing in our country a people superior to those of the present.
I am not content with the affection which you have for me, if you have it not also for all those who are doing you good, and among these, your master stands first, after your parents.
Love him as you would love a brother of mine; love him when he caresses and when he reproves you; when he is just, and when he appears to you to be unjust; love him when he is amiable and gracious; and love him even more when you see him sad.
Love him always.
And always pronounce with reverence that name of "teacher," which, after that of your father, is the noblest, the sweetest name which one man can apply to another man.
THY FATHER.
Wednesday, 4th.
MY father was right; the master was in a bad humor because he was not well; for the last three days, in fact, the assistant has been coming in his stead,-that little man, without a beard, who seems like a youth.
A shameful thing happened this morning.
There had been an uproar on the first and second days, in the school, because the assistant is very patient and does nothing but say, "Be quiet, be quiet, I beg of you."
But this morning they passed all bounds.
Such a noise arose, that his words were no longer audible, and he admonished and besought; but it was a mere waste of breath.
Twice the head-master appeared at the door and looked in; but the moment he disappeared the murmur increased as in a market.
It was in vain that Derossi and Garrone turned round and made signs to their comrades to be good, so that it was a shame.
No one paid any heed to them.
Stardi alone remained quiet, with his elbows on the bench, and his fists to his temples, meditating, perhaps, on his famous library; and Garoffi, that boy with the hooked nose and the postage-stamps, who was wholly occupied in making a catalogue of the subscribers at two centesimi each, for a lottery for a pocket inkstand.
The rest chattered and laughed, pounded on the points of pens fixed in the benches, and snapped pellets of paper at each other with the elastics of their garters.
The assistant grasped now one, now another, by the arm, and shook him; and he placed one of them against the wall-time wasted.
He no longer knew what to do, and he entreated them.
"Why do you behave like this?
Do you wish me to punish you by force?"
Then he thumped the little table with his fist, and shouted in a voice of wrath and lamentation, "Silence!
silence!
silence!"
It was difficult to hear him.
But the uproar continued to increase.
Franti threw a paper dart at him, some uttered cat-calls, others thumped each other on the head; the hurly-burly was indescribable; when, all of a sudden, the beadle entered and said:-
"Signor Master, the head-master has sent for you."
The master rose and went out in haste, with a gesture of despair.
Then the tumult began more vigorously than ever.
But suddenly Garrone sprang up, his face all convulsed, and his fists clenched, and shouted in a voice choked with rage:-
"Stop this!
You are brutes!
You take advantage of him because he is kind.
If he were to bruise your bones for you, you would be as abject as dogs.
You are a pack of cowards!
The first one of you that jeers at him again, I shall wait for outside, and I will break his teeth,-I swear it,-even under the very eyes of his father!"
All became silent.
Ah, what a fine thing it was to see Garrone, with his eyes darting flames!
He seemed to be a furious young lion.
He stared at the most daring, one after the other, and all hung their heads.
When the assistant re-entered, with red eyes, not a breath was audible.
He stood in amazement; then, catching sight of Garrone, who was still all fiery and trembling, he understood it all, and he said to him, with accents of great affection, as he might have spoken to a brother, "I thank you, Garrone."
I have been home with Stardi, who lives opposite the schoolhouse; and I really experienced a feeling of envy at the sight of his library.
He is not at all rich, and he cannot buy many books; but he preserves his schoolbooks with great care, as well as those which his relatives give him; and he lays aside every soldo that is given to him, and spends it at the bookseller's.
In this way he has collected a little library; and when his father perceived that he had this passion, he bought him a handsome bookcase of walnut wood, with a green curtain, and he has had most of his volumes bound for him in the colors that he likes.
Thus when he draws a little cord, the green curtain runs aside, and three rows of books of every color become visible, all ranged in order, and shining, with gilt titles on their backs,-books of tales, of travels, and of poetry; and some illustrated ones.
And he understands how to combine colors well: he places the white volumes next to the red ones, the yellow next the black, the blue beside the white, so that, viewed from a distance, they make a very fine appearance; and he amuses himself by varying the combinations.
He has made himself a catalogue.
He is like a librarian.
He is always standing near his books, dusting them, turning over the leaves, examining the bindings: it is something to see the care with which he opens them, with his big, stubby hands, and blows between the pages: then they seem perfectly new again.
I have worn out all of mine.
It is a festival for him to polish off every new book that he buys, to put it in its place, and to pick it up again to take another look at it from all sides, and to brood over it as a treasure.
He showed me nothing else for a whole hour.
His eyes were troubling him, because he had read too much.
At a certain time his father, who is large and thickset like himself, with a big head like his, entered the room, and gave him two or three taps on the nape of the neck, saying with that huge voice of his:-
"What do you think of him, eh?
of this head of bronze?
It is a stout head, that will succeed in anything, I assure you!"
And Stardi half closed his eyes, under these rough caresses, like a big hunting-dog.
I do not know, I did not dare to jest with him; it did not seem true to me, that he was only a year older than myself; and when he said to me, "Farewell until we meet again," at the door, with that face of his that always seems wrathful, I came very near replying to him, "I salute you, sir," as to a man.
I told my father afterwards, at home: "I don't understand it; Stardi has no natural talent, he has not fine manners, and his face is almost ridiculous; yet he suggests ideas to me."
And my father answered, "It is because he has character."
And I added, "During the hour that I spent with him he did not utter fifty words, he did not show me a single plaything, he did not laugh once; yet I liked to go there."
And my father answered, "That is because you esteem him."
Yes, but I also esteem Precossi; and to say that I esteem him is not enough,-Precossi, the son of the blacksmith-ironmonger,-that thin little fellow, who has kind, melancholy eyes and a frightened air; who is so timid that he says to every one, "Excuse me"; who is always sickly, and who, nevertheless, studies so much.
His father returns home, intoxicated with brandy, and beats him without the slightest reason in the world, and flings his books and his copy-books in the air with a backward turn of his hand; and he comes to school with the black and blue marks on his face, and sometimes with his face all swollen, and his eyes inflamed with much weeping.
But never, never can he be made to acknowledge that his father beats him.
"Your father has been beating you," his companions say to him; and he instantly exclaims, "That is not true!
it is not true!"
for the sake of not dishonoring his father.
"You did not burn this leaf," the teacher says to him, showing him his work, half burned.
"Yes," he replies, in a trembling voice; "I let it fall on the fire."
But we know very well, nevertheless, that his drunken father overturned the table and the light with a kick, while the boy was doing his work.
He lives in a garret of our house, on another staircase.
The portress tells my mother everything: my sister Silvia heard him screaming from the terrace one day, when his father had sent him headlong down stairs, because he had asked for a few soldi to buy a grammar.
His father drinks, but does not work, and his family suffers from hunger.
How often Precossi comes to school with an empty stomach and nibbles in secret at a roll which Garrone has given him, or at an apple brought to him by the schoolmistress with the red feather, who was his teacher in the first lower class.
But he never says, "I am hungry; my father does not give me anything to eat."
His father sometimes comes for him, when he chances to be passing the schoolhouse,-pallid, unsteady on his legs, with a fierce face, and his hair over his eyes, and his cap awry; and the poor boy trembles all over when he catches sight of him in the street; but he immediately runs to meet him, with a smile; and his father does not appear to see him, but seems to be thinking of something else.
Poor Precossi!
He mends his torn copy-books, borrows books to study his lessons, fastens the fragments of his shirt together with pins; and it is a pity to see him performing his gymnastics, with those huge shoes in which he is fairly lost, in those trousers which drag on the ground, and that jacket which is too long, and those huge sleeves turned back to the very elbows.
And he studies; he does his best; he would be one of the first, if he were able to work at home in peace.
This morning he came to school with the marks of finger-nails on one cheek, and they all began to say to him:-
"It is your father, and you cannot deny it this time; it was your father who did that to you.
Tell the head-master about it, and he will have him called to account for it."
But he sprang up, all flushed, with a voice trembling with indignation:-
"It's not true!
it's not true!
My father never beats me!"
But afterwards, during lesson time, his tears fell upon the bench, and when any one looked at him, he tried to smile, in order that he might not show it.
Poor Precossi!
To-morrow Derossi, Coretti, and Nelli are coming to my house; I want to tell him to come also; and I want to have him take luncheon with me: I want to treat him to books, and turn the house upside down to amuse him, and to fill his pockets with fruit, for the sake of seeing him contented for once, poor Precossi!
who is so good and so courageous.
Thursday, 12th.
This has been one of the finest Thursdays of the year for me.
At two o'clock, precisely, Derossi and Coretti came to the house, with Nelli, the hunchback: Precossi was not permitted by his father to come.
Derossi and Coretti were still laughing at their encounter with Crossi, the son of the vegetable-seller, in the street,-the boy with the useless arm and the red hair,-who was carrying a huge cabbage for sale, and with the soldo which he was to receive for the cabbage he was to go and buy a pen.
He was perfectly happy because his father had written from America that they might expect him any day.
Oh, the two beautiful hours that we passed together!
Derossi and Coretti are the two jolliest boys in the school; my father fell in love with them.
Coretti had on his chocolate-colored tights and his catskin cap.
He is a lively imp, who wants to be always doing something, stirring up something, setting something in motion.
He had already carried on his shoulders half a cartload of wood, early that morning; nevertheless, he galloped all over the house, taking note of everything and talking incessantly, as sprightly and nimble as a squirrel; and passing into the kitchen, he asked the cook how much we had to pay a myriagramme for wood, because his father sells it at forty-five centesimi.
He is always talking of his father, of the time when he was a soldier in the 49th regiment, at the battle of Custoza, where he served in the squadron of Prince Umberto; and he is so gentle in his manners!
It makes no difference that he was born and brought up surrounded by wood: he has nobility in his blood, in his heart, as my father says.
And Derossi amused us greatly; he knows geography like a master: he shut his eyes and said:-
"There, I see the whole of Italy; the Apennines, which extend to the Ionian Sea, the rivers flowing here and there, the white cities, the gulfs, the blue bays, the green islands;" and he repeated the names correctly in their order and very rapidly, as though he were reading them on the map; and at the sight of him standing thus, with his head held high, with all his golden curls, with his closed eyes, and all dressed in bright blue with gilt buttons, as straight and handsome as a statue, we were all filled with admiration.
In one hour he had learned by heart nearly three pages, which he is to recite the day after to-morrow, for the anniversary of the funeral of King Vittorio.
And even Nelli gazed at him in wonder and affection, as he rubbed the folds of his apron of black cloth, and smiled with his clear and mournful eyes.
This visit gave me a great deal of pleasure; it left something like sparks in my mind and my heart.
And it pleased me, too, when they went away, to see poor Nelli between the other two tall, strong fellows, who carried him home on their arms, and made him laugh as I have never seen him laugh before.
On returning to the dining-room, I perceived that the picture representing Rigoletto, the hunchbacked jester, was no longer there.
My father had taken it away in order that Nelli might not see it.
January, 17th.
To-day, at two o'clock, as soon as we entered the schoolroom, the master called up Derossi, who went and took his place in front of the little table facing us, and began to recite, in his vibrating tones, gradually raising his limpid voice, and growing flushed in the face:-
"Four years ago, on this day, at this hour, there arrived in front of the Pantheon at Rome, the funeral car which bore the body of Vittorio Emanuele II., the first king of Italy, dead after a reign of twenty-nine years, during which the great Italian fatherland, broken up into seven states, and oppressed by strangers and by tyrants, had been brought back to life in one single state, free and independent; after a reign of twenty-nine years, which he had made illustrious and beneficent with his valor, with loyalty, with boldness amid perils, with wisdom amid triumphs, with constancy amid misfortunes.
The funeral car arrived, laden with wreaths, after having traversed Rome under a rain of flowers, amid the silence of an immense and sorrowing multitude, which had assembled from every part of Italy; preceded by a legion of generals and by a throng of ministers and princes, followed by a retinue of crippled veterans, by a forest of banners, by the envoys of three hundred towns, by everything which represents the power and the glory of a people, it arrived before the august temple where the tomb awaited it.
At that moment twelve cuirassiers removed the coffin from the car.
At that moment Italy bade her last farewell to her dead king, to her old king whom she had loved so dearly, the last farewell to her soldier, to her father, to the twenty-nine most fortunate and most blessed years in her history.
It was a grand and solemn moment.
The looks, the souls, of all were quivering at the sight of that coffin and the darkened banners of the eighty regiments of the army of Italy, borne by eighty officers, drawn up in line on its passage: for Italy was there in those eighty tokens, which recalled the thousands of dead, the torrents of blood, our most sacred glories, our most holy sacrifices, our most tremendous griefs.
The coffin, borne by the cuirassiers, passed, and then the banners bent forward all together in salute,-the banners of the new regiments, the old, tattered banners of Goito, of Pastrengo, of Santa Lucia, of Novara, of the Crimea, of Palestro, of San Martino, of Castelfidardo; eighty black veils fell, a hundred medals clashed against the staves, and that sonorous and confused uproar, which stirred the blood of all, was like the sound of a thousand human voices saying all together, 'Farewell, good king, gallant king, loyal king!
Thou wilt live in the heart of thy people as long as the sun shall shine over Italy.'
"After this, the banners rose heavenward once more, and King Vittorio entered into the immortal glory of the tomb."
Saturday, 21st.
Only one boy was capable of laughing while Derossi was declaiming the funeral oration of the king, and Franti laughed.
I detest that fellow.
He is wicked.
When a father comes to the school to reprove his son, he enjoys it; when any one cries, he laughs.
He trembles before Garrone, and he strikes the little mason because he is small; he torments Crossi because he has a helpless arm; he ridicules Precossi, whom every one respects; he even jeers at Robetti, that boy in the second grade who walks on crutches, through having saved a child.
He provokes those who are weaker than himself, and when it comes to blows, he grows ferocious and tries to do harm.
There is something beneath that low forehead, in those turbid eyes, which he keeps nearly concealed under the visor of his small cap of waxed cloth, which inspires a shudder.
He fears no one; he laughs in the master's face; he steals when he gets a chance; he denies it with an impenetrable countenance; he is always engaged in a quarrel with some one; he brings big pins to school, to prick his neighbors with; he tears the buttons from his own jackets and from those of others, and plays with them: his paper, books, and copy-books are all crushed, torn, dirty; his ruler is jagged, his pens gnawed, his nails bitten, his clothes covered with stains and rents which he has got in his brawls.
They say that his mother has fallen ill from the trouble that he causes her, and that his father has driven him from the house three times; his mother comes every now and then to make inquiries, and she always goes away in tears.
He hates school, he hates his companions, he hates the teacher.
The master sometimes pretends not to see his rascalities, and he behaves all the worse.
He tried to get a hold on him by kind treatment, and the boy ridiculed him for it.
He said terrible things to him, and the boy covered his face with his hands, as though he were crying; but he was laughing.
He was suspended from school for three days, and he returned more perverse and insolent than before.
Derossi said to him one day, "Stop it!
don't you see how much the teacher suffers?"
and the other threatened to stick a nail into his stomach.
But this morning, at last, he got himself driven out like a dog.
While the master was giving to Garrone the rough draft of The Sardinian Drummer-Boy, the monthly story for January, to copy, he threw a petard on the floor, which exploded, making the schoolroom resound as from a discharge of musketry.
The whole class was startled by it.
The master sprang to his feet, and cried:-
"Franti, leave the school!"
The latter retorted, "It wasn't I;" but he laughed.
The master repeated:-
"Go!"
"I won't stir," he answered.
Then the master lost his temper, and flung himself upon him, seized him by the arms, and tore him from his seat.
He resisted, ground his teeth, and made him carry him out by main force.
The master bore him thus, heavy as he was, to the head-master, and then returned to the schoolroom alone and seated himself at his little table, with his head clutched in his hands, gasping, and with an expression of such weariness and trouble that it was painful to look at him.
"After teaching school for thirty years!"
he exclaimed sadly, shaking his head.
No one breathed.
His hands were trembling with fury, and the perpendicular wrinkle that he has in the middle of his forehead was so deep that it seemed like a wound.
Poor master!
All felt sorry for him.
Derossi rose and said, "Signor Master, do not grieve.
We love you."
And then he grew a little more tranquil, and said, "We will go on with the lesson, boys."
(Monthly Story.)
On the first day of the battle of Custoza, on the 24th of July, 1848, about sixty soldiers, belonging to an infantry regiment of our army, who had been sent to an elevation to occupy an isolated house, suddenly found themselves assaulted by two companies of Austrian soldiers, who, showering them with bullets from various quarters, hardly gave them time to take refuge in the house and to barricade the doors, after leaving several dead and wounded on the field.
Having barred the doors, our men ran in haste to the windows of the ground floor and the first story, and began to fire brisk discharges at their assailants, who, approaching gradually, ranged in a semicircle, made vigorous reply.
The sixty Italian soldiers were commanded by two non-commissioned officers and a captain, a tall, dry, austere old man, with white hair and mustache; and with them there was a Sardinian drummer-boy, a lad of a little over fourteen, who did not look twelve, small, with an olive-brown complexion, and two small, deep, sparkling eyes.
The captain directed the defence from a room on the first floor, launching commands that seemed like pistol-shots, and no sign of emotion was visible on his iron countenance.
The drummer-boy, a little pale, but firm on his legs, had jumped upon a table, and was holding fast to the wall and stretching out his neck in order to gaze out of the windows, and athwart the smoke on the fields he saw the white uniforms of the Austrians, who were slowly advancing.
The house was situated at the summit of a steep declivity, and on the side of the slope it had but one high window, corresponding to a chamber in the roof: therefore the Austrians did not threaten the house from that quarter, and the slope was free; the fire beat only upon the front and the two ends.
But it was an infernal fire, a hailstorm of leaden bullets, which split the walls on the outside, ground the tiles to powder, and in the interior cracked ceilings, furniture, window-frames, and door-frames, sending splinters of wood flying through the air, and clouds of plaster, and fragments of kitchen utensils and glass, whizzing, and rebounding, and breaking everything with a noise like the crushing of a skull.
From time to time one of the soldiers who were firing from the windows fell crashing back to the floor, and was dragged to one side.
Some staggered from room to room, pressing their hands on their wounds.
There was already one dead body in the kitchen, with its forehead cleft.
The semicircle of the enemy was drawing together.
At a certain point the captain, hitherto impassive, was seen to make a gesture of uneasiness, and to leave the room with huge strides, followed by a sergeant.
Three minutes later the sergeant returned on a run, and summoned the drummer-boy, making him a sign to follow.
The lad followed him at a quick pace up the wooden staircase, and entered with him into a bare garret, where he saw the captain writing with a pencil on a sheet of paper, as he leaned against the little window; and on the floor at his feet lay the well-rope.
The captain folded the sheet of paper, and said sharply, as he fixed his cold gray eyes, before which all the soldiers trembled, on the boy:-
"Drummer!"
The drummer-boy put his hand to his visor.
The captain said, "You have courage."
The boy's eyes flashed.
"Yes, captain," he replied.
"Look down there," said the captain, pushing him to the window; "on the plain, near the houses of Villafranca, where there is a gleam of bayonets.
There stand our troops, motionless.
You are to take this billet, tie yourself to the rope, descend from the window, get down that slope in an instant, make your way across the fields, arrive at our men, and give the note to the first officer you see.
Throw off your belt and knapsack."
The drummer took off his belt and knapsack and thrust the note into his breast pocket; the sergeant flung the rope out of the window, and held one end of it clutched fast in his hands; the captain helped the lad to clamber out of the small window, with his back turned to the landscape.
"Now look out," he said; "the salvation of this detachment lies in your courage and in your legs."
"Trust to me, Signor Captain," replied the drummer-boy, as he let himself down.
"Bend over on the slope," said the captain, grasping the rope, with the sergeant.
"Never fear."
"God aid you!"
In a few moments the drummer-boy was on the ground; the sergeant drew in the rope and disappeared; the captain stepped impetuously in front of the window and saw the boy flying down the slope.
He was already hoping that he had succeeded in escaping unobserved, when five or six little puffs of powder, which rose from the earth in front of and behind the lad, warned him that he had been espied by the Austrians, who were firing down upon him from the top of the elevation: these little clouds were thrown into the air by the bullets.
But the drummer continued to run at a headlong speed.
All at once he fell to the earth.
"He is killed!"
roared the captain, biting his fist.
But before he had uttered the word he saw the drummer spring up again.
"Ah, only a fall," he said to himself, and drew a long breath.
The drummer, in fact, set out again at full speed; but he limped.
"He has turned his ankle," thought the captain.
Again several cloudlets of powder smoke rose here and there about the lad, but ever more distant.
He was safe.
The captain uttered an exclamation of triumph.
But he continued to follow him with his eyes, trembling because it was an affair of minutes: if he did not arrive yonder in the shortest possible time with that billet, which called for instant succor, either all his soldiers would be killed or he should be obliged to surrender himself a prisoner with them.
The boy ran rapidly for a space, then relaxed his pace and limped, then resumed his course, but grew constantly more fatigued, and every little while he stumbled and paused.
"Perhaps a bullet has grazed him," thought the captain, and he noted all his movements, quivering with excitement; and he encouraged him, he spoke to him, as though he could hear him; he measured incessantly, with a flashing eye, the space intervening between the fleeing boy and that gleam of arms which he could see in the distance on the plain amid the fields of grain gilded by the sun.
And meanwhile he heard the whistle and the crash of the bullets in the rooms beneath, the imperious and angry shouts of the sergeants and the officers, the piercing laments of the wounded, the ruin of furniture, and the fall of rubbish.
"On!
courage!"
he shouted, following the far-off drummer with his glance.
"Forward!
run!
He halts, that cursed boy!
Ah, he resumes his course!"
An officer came panting to tell him that the enemy, without slackening their fire, were flinging out a white flag to hint at a surrender.
"Don't reply to them!"
he cried, without detaching his eyes from the boy, who was already on the plain, but who was no longer running, and who seemed to be dragging himself along with difficulty.
"Go!
run!"
said the captain, clenching his teeth and his fists; "let them kill you; die, you rascal, but go!"
Then he uttered a horrible oath.
"Ah, the infamous poltroon!
he has sat down!"
In fact, the boy, whose head he had hitherto been able to see projecting above a field of grain, had disappeared, as though he had fallen; but, after the lapse of a minute, his head came into sight again; finally, it was lost behind the hedges, and the captain saw it no more.
Then he descended impetuously; the bullets were coming in a tempest; the rooms were encumbered with the wounded, some of whom were whirling round like drunken men, and clutching at the furniture; the walls and floor were bespattered with blood; corpses lay across the doorways; the lieutenant had had his arm shattered by a ball; smoke and clouds of dust enveloped everything.
"Courage!"
shouted the captain.
"Stand firm at your post!
Succor is on the way!
Courage for a little while longer!"
The Austrians had approached still nearer: their contorted faces were already visible through the smoke, and amid the crash of the firing their savage and offensive shouts were audible, as they uttered insults, suggested a surrender, and threatened slaughter.
Some soldiers were terrified, and withdrew from the windows; the sergeants drove them forward again.
But the fire of the defence weakened; discouragement made its appearance on all faces.
It was not possible to protract the resistance longer.
At a given moment the fire of the Austrians slackened, and a thundering voice shouted, first in German and then in Italian, "Surrender!"
"No!"
howled the captain from a window.
And the firing recommenced more fast and furious on both sides.
More soldiers fell.
Already more than one window was without defenders.
The fatal moment was near at hand.
The captain shouted through his teeth, in a strangled voice, "They are not coming!
they are not coming!"
and rushed wildly about, twisting his sword about in his convulsively clenched hand, and resolved to die; when a sergeant descending from the garret, uttered a piercing shout, "They are coming!"
"They are coming!"
repeated the captain, with a cry of joy.
At that cry all, well and wounded, sergeants and officers, rushed to the windows, and the resistance became fierce once more.
A few moments later a sort of uncertainty was noticeable, and a beginning of disorder among the foe.
Suddenly the captain hastily collected a little troop in the room on the ground floor, in order to make a sortie with fixed bayonets.
Then he flew up stairs.
Scarcely had he arrived there when they heard a hasty trampling of feet, accompanied by a formidable hurrah, and saw from the windows the two-pointed hats of the Italian carabineers advancing through the smoke, a squadron rushing forward at great speed, and a lightning flash of blades whirling in the air, as they fell on heads, on shoulders, and on backs.
Then the troop darted out of the door, with bayonets lowered; the enemy wavered, were thrown into disorder, and turned their backs; the field was left unincumbered, the house was free, and a little later two battalions of Italian infantry and two cannons occupied the eminence.
The captain, with the soldiers that remained to him, rejoined his regiment, went on fighting, and was slightly wounded in the left hand by a bullet on the rebound, in the final assault with bayonets.
The day ended with the victory on our side.
But on the following day, the conflict having begun again, the Italians were overpowered by the overwhelming numbers of the Austrians, in spite of a valorous resistance, and on the morning of the 27th they sadly retreated towards the Mincio.
The captain, although wounded, made the march on foot with his soldiers, weary and silent, and, arrived at the close of the day at Goito, on the Mincio, he immediately sought out his lieutenant, who had been picked up with his arm shattered, by our ambulance corps, and who must have arrived before him.
He was directed to a church, where the field hospital had been installed in haste.
Thither he betook himself.
The church was full of wounded men, ranged in two lines of beds, and on mattresses spread on the floor; two doctors and numerous assistants were going and coming, busily occupied; and suppressed cries and groans were audible.
No sooner had the captain entered than he halted and cast a glance around, in search of his officer.
At that moment he heard himself called in a weak voice,-"Signor Captain!"
He turned round.
It was his drummer-boy.
He was lying on a cot bed, covered to the breast with a coarse window curtain, in red and white squares, with his arms on the outside, pale and thin, but with eyes which still sparkled like black gems.
"Are you here?"
asked the captain, amazed, but still sharply.
"Bravo!
You did your duty."
"I did all that I could," replied the drummer-boy.
"Were you wounded?"
said the captain, seeking with his eyes for his officer in the neighboring beds.
"What could one expect?"
said the lad, who gained courage by speaking, expressing the lofty satisfaction of having been wounded for the first time, without which he would not have dared to open his mouth in the presence of this captain; "I had a fine run, all bent over, but suddenly they caught sight of me.
I should have arrived twenty minutes earlier if they had not hit me.
Luckily, I soon came across a captain of the staff, to whom I gave the note.
But it was hard work to get down after that caress!
I was dying of thirst.
I was afraid that I should not get there at all.
I wept with rage at the thought that at every moment of delay another man was setting out yonder for the other world.
But enough!
I did what I could.
I am content.
But, with your permission, captain, you should look to yourself: you are losing blood."
Several drops of blood had in fact trickled down on the captain's fingers from his imperfectly bandaged palm.
"Would you like to have me give the bandage a turn, captain?
Hold it here a minute."
The captain held out his left hand, and stretched out his right to help the lad to loosen the knot and to tie it again; but no sooner had the boy raised himself from his pillow than he turned pale and was obliged to support his head once more.
"That will do, that will do," said the captain, looking at him and withdrawing his bandaged hand, which the other tried to retain.
"Attend to your own affairs, instead of thinking of others, for things that are not severe may become serious if they are neglected."
The drummer-boy shook his head.
"But you," said the captain, observing him attentively, "must have lost a great deal of blood to be as weak as this."
"Must have lost a great deal of blood!"
replied the boy, with a smile.
"Something else besides blood: look here."
And with one movement he drew aside the coverlet.
The captain started back a pace in horror.
The lad had but one leg.
His left leg had been amputated above the knee; the stump was swathed in blood-stained cloths.
At that moment a small, plump, military surgeon passed, in his shirt-sleeves.
"Ah, captain," he said, rapidly, nodding towards the drummer, "this is an unfortunate case; there is a leg that might have been saved if he had not exerted himself in such a crazy manner-that cursed inflammation!
It had to be cut off away up here.
Oh, but he's a brave lad.
I can assure you!
He never shed a tear, nor uttered a cry!
He was proud of being an Italian boy, while I was performing the operation, upon my word of honor.
He comes of a good race, by Heavens!"
And away he went, on a run.
The captain wrinkled his heavy white brows, gazed fixedly at the drummer-boy, and spread the coverlet over him again, and slowly, then as though unconsciously, and still gazing intently at him, he raised his hand to his head, and lifted his cap.
"Signor Captain!"
exclaimed the boy in amazement.
"What are you doing, captain?
To me!"
And then that rough soldier, who had never said a gentle word to an inferior, replied in an indescribably sweet and affectionate voice, "I am only a captain; you are a hero."
Then he threw himself with wide-spread arms upon the drummer-boy, and kissed him three times upon the heart.
Tuesday, 24th.
Since the tale of the Drummer-boy has touched your heart, it should be easy for you this morning to do your composition for examination- Why you love Italy -well.
Why do I love Italy?
Do not a hundred answers present themselves to you on the instant?
I love Italy because my mother is an Italian; because the blood that flows in my veins is Italian; because the soil in which are buried the dead whom my mother mourns and whom my father venerates is Italian; because the town in which I was born, the language that I speak, the books that educate me,-because my brother, my sister, my comrades, the great people among whom I live, and the beautiful nature which surrounds me, and all that I see, that I love, that I study, that I admire, is Italian.
Oh, you cannot feel that affection in its entirety!
You will feel it when you become a man; when, returning from a long journey, after a prolonged absence, you step up in the morning to the bulwarks of the vessel and see on the distant horizon the lofty blue mountains of your country; you will feel it then in the impetuous flood of tenderness which will fill your eyes with tears and will wrest a cry from your heart.
You will feel it in some great and distant city, in that impulse of the soul which will impel you from the strange throng towards a workingman from whom you have heard in passing a word in your own tongue.
You will feel it in that sad and proud wrath which will drive the blood to your brow when you hear insults to your country from the mouth of a stranger.
You will feel it in more proud and vigorous measure on the day when the menace of a hostile race shall call forth a tempest of fire upon your country, and when you shall behold arms raging on every side, youths thronging in legions, fathers kissing their children and saying, "Courage!"
mothers bidding adieu to their young sons and crying, "Conquer!"
You will feel it like a joy divine if you have the good fortune to behold the re-entrance to your town of the regiments, weary, ragged, with thinned ranks, yet terrible, with the splendor of victory in their eyes, and their banners torn by bullets, followed by a vast convoy of brave fellows, bearing their bandaged heads and their stumps of arms loftily, amid a wild throng, which covers them with flowers, with blessings, and with kisses.
Then you will comprehend the love of country; then you will feel your country, Enrico.
It is a grand and sacred thing.
May I one day see you return in safety from a battle fought for her, safe,-you who are my flesh and soul; but if I should learn that you have preserved your life because you were concealed from death, your father, who welcomes you with a cry of joy when you return from school, will receive you with a sob of anguish, and I shall never be able to love you again, and I shall die with that dagger in my heart.
THY FATHER.
Wednesday, 25th.
The boy who wrote the best composition of all on our country was Derossi, as usual.
And Votini, who thought himself sure of the first medal-I like Votini well enough, although he is rather vain and does polish himself up a trifle too much,-but it makes me scorn him, now that I am his neighbor on the bench, to see how envious he is of Derossi.
He would like to vie with him; he studies hard, but he cannot do it by any possibility, for the other is ten times as strong as he is on every point; and Votini rails at him.
Carlo Nobis envies him also; but he has so much pride in his body that, purely from pride, he does not allow it to be perceived.
Votini, on the other hand, betrays himself: he complains of his difficulties at home, and says that the master is unjust to him; and when Derossi replies so promptly and so well to questions, as he always does, his face clouds over, he hangs his head, pretends not to hear, or tries to laugh, but he laughs awkwardly.
And thus every one knows about it, so that when the master praises Derossi they all turn to look at Votini, who chews his venom, and the little mason makes a hare's face at him.
To-day, for instance, he was put to the torture.
The head-master entered the school and announced the result of the examination,-"Derossi ten tenths and the first medal."
Votini gave a huge sneeze.
The master looked at him: it was not hard to understand the matter.
"Votini," he said, "do not let the serpent of envy enter your body; it is a serpent which gnaws at the brain and corrupts the heart."
Every one stared at him except Derossi.
Votini tried to make some answer, but could not; he sat there as though turned to stone, and with a white face.
Then, while the master was conducting the lesson, he began to write in large characters on a sheet of paper, " I am not envious of those who gain the first medal through favoritism and injustice. "
It was a note which he meant to send to Derossi.
But, in the meantime, I perceived that Derossi's neighbors were plotting among themselves, and whispering in each other's ears, and one cut with penknife from paper a big medal on which they had drawn a black serpent.
But Votini did not notice this.
The master went out for a few moments.
All at once Derossi's neighbors rose and left their seats, for the purpose of coming and solemnly presenting the paper medal to Votini.
The whole class was prepared for a scene.
Votini had already begun to quiver all over.
Derossi exclaimed:-
"Give that to me!"
"So much the better," they replied; "you are the one who ought to carry it."
Derossi took the medal and tore it into bits.
At that moment the master returned, and resumed the lesson.
I kept my eye on Votini.
He had turned as red as a coal.
He took his sheet of paper very, very quietly, as though in absence of mind, rolled it into a ball, on the sly, put it into his mouth, chewed it a little, and then spit it out under the bench.
When school broke up, Votini, who was a little confused, let fall his blotting-paper, as he passed Derossi.
Derossi politely picked it up, put it in his satchel, and helped him to buckle the straps.
Votini dared not raise his eyes.
Saturday, 28th.
But Votini is incorrigible.
Yesterday morning, during the lesson on religion, in the presence of the head-master, the teacher asked Derossi if he knew by heart the two couplets in the reading-book,-
"Where'er I turn my gaze, 'tis Thee, great God, I see."
Derossi said that he did not, and Votini suddenly exclaimed, "I know them!"
with a smile, as though to pique Derossi.
But he was piqued himself, instead, for he could not recite the poetry, because Franti's mother suddenly flew into the schoolroom, breathless, with her gray hair dishevelled and all wet with snow, and pushing before her her son, who had been suspended from school for a week.
What a sad scene we were doomed to witness!
The poor woman flung herself almost on her knees before the head-master, with clasped hands, and besought him:-
"Oh, Signor Director, do me the favor to put my boy back in school!
He has been at home for three days.
I have kept him hidden; but God have mercy on him, if his father finds out about this affair: he will murder him!
Have pity!
I no longer know what to do!
I entreat you with my whole soul!"
The director tried to lead her out, but she resisted, still continuing to pray and to weep.
"Oh, if you only knew the trouble that this boy has caused me, you would have compassion!
Do me this favor!
I hope that he will reform.
I shall not live long, Signor Director; I bear death within me; but I should like to see him reformed before my death, because"-and she broke into a passion of weeping-"he is my son-I love him-I shall die in despair!
Take him back once more, Signor Director, that a misfortune may not happen in the family!
Do it out of pity for a poor woman!"
And she covered her face with her hands and sobbed.
Franti stood impassive, and hung his head.
The head-master looked at him, reflected a little, then said, "Franti, go to your place."
Then the woman removed her hands from her face, quite comforted, and began to express thanks upon thanks, without giving the director a chance to speak, and made her way towards the door, wiping her eyes, and saying hastily: "I beg of you, my son.-May all have patience.-Thanks, Signor Director; you have performed a deed of mercy.-Be a good boy.-Good day, boys.-Thanks, Signor Teacher; good by, and forgive a poor mother."
And after bestowing another supplicating glance at her son from the door, she went away, pulling up the shawl which was trailing after her, pale, bent, with a head which still trembled, and we heard her coughing all the way down the stairs.
The head-master gazed intently at Franti, amid the silence of the class, and said to him in accents of a kind to make him tremble:-
"Franti, you are killing your mother!"
We all turned to look at Franti; and that infamous boy smiled.
Sunday, 29th.
Very beautiful, Enrico, was the impetuosity with which you flung yourself on your mother's heart on your return from your lesson of religion.
Yes, your master said grand and consoling things to you.
God threw you in each other's arms; he will never part you.
When I die, when your father dies, we shall not speak to each other these despairing words, "Mamma, papa, Enrico, I shall never see you again!"
We shall see each other again in another life, where he who has suffered much in this life will receive compensation; where he who has loved much on earth will find again the souls whom he has loved, in a world without sin, without sorrow, and without death.
But we must all render ourselves worthy of that other life.
Reflect, my son.
Every good action of yours, every impulse of affection for those who love you, every courteous act towards your companions, every noble thought of yours, is like a leap towards that other world.
And every misfortune, also, serves to raise you towards that world; every sorrow, for every sorrow is the expiation of a sin, every tear blots out a stain.
Make it your rule to become better and more loving every day than the day before.
Say every morning, "To-day I will do something for which my conscience will praise me, and with which my father will be satisfied; something which will render me beloved by such or such a comrade, by my teacher, by my brother, or by others."
And beseech God to give you the strength to put your resolution into practice.
"Lord, I wish to be good, noble, courageous, gentle, sincere; help me; grant that every night, when my mother gives me her last kiss, I may be able to say to her, 'You kiss this night a nobler and more worthy boy than you kissed last night.'"
Keep always in your thoughts that other superhuman and blessed Enrico which you may be after this life.
And pray.
You cannot imagine the sweetness that you experience,-how much better a mother feels when she sees her child with hands clasped in prayer.
When I behold you praying, it seems impossible to me that there should not be some one there gazing at you and listening to you.
Then I believe more firmly that there is a supreme goodness and an infinite pity; I love you more, I work with more ardor, I endure with more force, I forgive with all my heart, and I think of death with serenity.
O great and good God!
To hear once more, after death, the voice of my mother, to meet my children again, to see my Enrico once more, my Enrico, blessed and immortal, and to clasp him in an embrace which shall nevermore be loosed, nevermore, nevermore to all eternity!
Oh, pray!
let us pray, let us love each other, let us be good, let us bear this celestial hope in our hearts and souls, my adored child!
THY MOTHER.
Saturday, 4th.
THIS morning the superintendent of the schools, a gentleman with a white beard, and dressed in black, came to bestow the medals.
He entered with the head-master a little before the close and seated himself beside the teacher.
He questioned a few, then gave the first medal to Derossi, and before giving the second, he stood for a few moments listening to the teacher and the head-master, who were talking to him in a low voice.
All were asking themselves, "To whom will he give the second?"
The superintendent said aloud:-
"Pupil Pietro Precossi has merited the second medal this week,-merited it by his work at home, by his lessons, by his handwriting, by his conduct in every way."
All turned to look at Precossi, and it was evident that all took pleasure in it.
Precossi rose in such confusion that he did not know where he stood.
"Come here," said the superintendent.
Precossi sprang up from his seat and stepped up to the master's table.
The superintendent looked attentively at that little waxen face, at that puny body enveloped in turned and ill-fitting garments, at those kind, sad eyes, which avoided his, but which hinted at a story of suffering; then he said to him, in a voice full of affection, as he fastened the medal on his shoulder:-
"I give you the medal, Precossi.
No one is more worthy to wear it than you.
I bestow it not only on your intelligence and your good will; I bestow it on your heart, I give it to your courage, to your character of a brave and good son.
Is it not true," he added, turning to the class, "that he deserves it also on that score?"
"Yes, yes!"
all answered, with one voice.
Precossi made a movement of the throat as though he were swallowing something, and cast upon the benches a very sweet look, which was expressive of immense gratitude.
"Go, my dear boy," said the superintendent; "and may God protect you!"
It was the hour for dismissing the school.
Our class got out before the others.
As soon as we were outside the door, whom should we espy there, in the large hall, just at the entrance?
The father of Precossi, the blacksmith, pallid as was his wont, with fierce face, hair hanging over his eyes, his cap awry, and unsteady on his legs.
The teacher caught sight of him instantly, and whispered to the superintendent.
The latter sought out Precossi in haste, and taking him by the hand, he led him to his father.
The boy was trembling.
The boy and the superintendent approached; many boys collected around them.
"Is it true that you are the father of this lad?"
demanded the superintendent of the blacksmith, with a cheerful air, as though they were friends.
And, without awaiting a reply:-
"I rejoice with you.
Look: he has won the second medal over fifty-four of his comrades.
He has deserved it by his composition, his arithmetic, everything.
He is a boy of great intelligence and good will, who will accomplish great things; a fine boy, who possesses the affection and esteem of all.
You may feel proud of him, I assure you."
The blacksmith, who had stood there with open mouth listening to him, stared at the superintendent and the head-master, and then at his son, who was standing before him with downcast eyes and trembling; and as though he had remembered and comprehended then, for the first time, all that he had made the little fellow suffer, and all the goodness, the heroic constancy, with which the latter had borne it, he displayed in his countenance a certain stupid wonder, then a sullen remorse, and finally a sorrowful and impetuous tenderness, and with a rapid gesture he caught the boy round the head and strained him to his breast.
We all passed before them.
I invited him to come to the house on Thursday, with Garrone and Crossi; others saluted him; one bestowed a caress on him, another touched his medal, all said something to him; and his father stared at us in amazement, as he still held his son's head pressed to his breast, while the boy sobbed.
Sunday, 5th.
That medal given to Precossi has awakened a remorse in me.
I have never earned one yet!
For some time past I have not been studying, and I am discontented with myself, and the teacher, my father and mother are discontented with me.
I no longer experience the pleasure in amusing myself that I did formerly, when I worked with a will, and then sprang up from the table and ran to my games full of mirth, as though I had not played for a month.
Neither do I sit down to the table with my family with the same contentment as of old.
I have always a shadow in my soul, an inward voice, that says to me continually, "It won't do; it won't do."
In the evening I see a great many boys pass through the square on their return from work, in the midst of a group of workingmen, weary but merry.
They step briskly along, impatient to reach their homes and suppers, and they talk loudly, laughing and slapping each other on the shoulder with hands blackened with coal, or whitened with plaster; and I reflect that they have been working since daybreak up to this hour.
And with them are also many others, who are still smaller, who have been standing all day on the summits of roofs, in front of ovens, among machines, and in the water, and underground, with nothing to eat but a little bread; and I feel almost ashamed, I, who in all that time have accomplished nothing but scribble four small pages, and that reluctantly.
Ah, I am discontented, discontented!
I see plainly that my father is out of humor, and would like to tell me so; but he is sorry, and he is still waiting.
My dear father, who works so hard!
all is yours, all that I see around me in the house, all that I touch, all that I wear and eat, all that affords me instruction and diversion,-all is the fruit of your toil, and I do not work; all has cost you thought, privations, trouble, effort; and I make no effort.
Ah, no; this is too unjust, and causes me too much pain.
I will begin this very day; I will apply myself to my studies, like Stardi, with clenched fists and set teeth.
I will set about it with all the strength of my will and my heart.
I will conquer my drowsiness in the evening, I will come down promptly in the morning, I will cudgel my brains without ceasing, I will chastise my laziness without mercy.
I will toil, suffer, even to the extent of making myself ill; but I will put a stop, once for all, to this languishing and tiresome life, which is degrading me and causing sorrow to others.
Courage!
to work!
To work with all my soul, and all my nerves!
To work, which will restore to me sweet repose, pleasing games, cheerful meals!
To work, which will give me back again the kindly smile of my teacher, the blessed kiss of my father!
Friday, 10th.
Precossi came to our house to-day with Garrone.
I do not think that two sons of princes would have been received with greater delight.
This is the first time that Garrone has been here, because he is rather shy, and then he is ashamed to show himself because he is so large, and is still in the third grade.
We all went to open the door when they rang.
Crossi did not come, because his father has at last arrived from America, after an absence of seven years.
My mother kissed Precossi at once.
My father introduced Garrone to her, saying:-
"Here he is.
This lad is not only a good boy; he is a man of honor and a gentleman."
And the boy dropped his big, shaggy head, with a sly smile at me.
Precossi had on his medal, and he was happy, because his father has gone to work again, and has not drunk anything for the last five days, wants him to be always in the workshop to keep him company, and seems quite another man.
We began to play, and I brought out all my things.
Precossi was enchanted with my train of cars, with the engine that goes of itself on being wound up.
He had never seen anything of the kind.
He devoured the little red and yellow cars with his eyes.
I gave him the key to play with, and he knelt down to his amusement, and did not raise his head again.
I have never seen him so pleased.
He kept saying, "Excuse me, excuse me," to everything, and motioning to us with his hands, that we should not stop the engine; and then he picked it up and replaced the cars with a thousand precautions, as though they had been made of glass.
He was afraid of tarnishing them with his breath, and he polished them up again, examining them top and bottom, and smiling to himself.
We all stood around him and gazed at him.
We looked at that slender neck, those poor little ears, which I had seen bleeding one day, that jacket with the sleeves turned up, from which projected two sickly little arms, which had been upraised to ward off blows from his face.
Oh!
at that moment I could have cast all my playthings and all my books at his feet, I could have torn the last morsel of bread from my lips to give to him, I could have divested myself of my clothing to clothe him, I could have flung myself on my knees to kiss his hand.
"I will at least give you the train," I thought; but-was necessary to ask permission of my father.
At that moment I felt a bit of paper thrust into my hand.
I looked; it was written in pencil by my father; it said:
"Your train pleases Precossi.
He has no playthings.
Does your heart suggest nothing to you?"
Instantly I seized the engine and the cars in both hands, and placed the whole in his arms, saying:-
"Take this; it is yours."
He looked at me, and did not understand.
"It is yours," I said; "I give it to you."
Then he looked at my father and mother, in still greater astonishment, and asked me:-
"But why?"
My father said to him:-
"Enrico gives it to you because he is your friend, because he loves you-to celebrate your medal."
Precossi asked timidly:-
"I may carry it away-home?"
"Of course!"
we all responded.
He was already at the door, but he dared not go out.
He was happy!
He begged our pardon with a mouth that smiled and quivered.
Garrone helped him to wrap up the train in a handkerchief, and as he bent over, he made the things with which his pockets were filled rattle.
"Some day," said Precossi to me, "you shall come to the shop to see my father at work.
I will give you some nails."
My mother put a little bunch of flowers into Garrone's buttonhole, for him to carry to his mother in her name.
Garrone said, "Thanks," in his big voice, without raising his chin from his breast.
But all his kind and noble soul shone in his eyes.
Saturday, 11th.
The idea of Carlo Nobis rubbing off his sleeve affectedly, when Precossi touches him in passing!
That fellow is pride incarnate because his father is a rich man.
But Derossi's father is rich too.
He would like to have a bench to himself; he is afraid that the rest will soil it; he looks down on everybody and always has a scornful smile on his lips: woe to him who stumbles over his foot, when we go out in files two by two!
For a mere trifle he flings an insulting word in your face, or a threat to get his father to come to the school.
It is true that his father did give him a good lesson when he called the little son of the charcoal-man a ragamuffin.
I have never seen so disagreeable a schoolboy!
No one speaks to him, no one says good by to him when he goes out; there is not even a dog who would give him a suggestion when he does not know his lesson.
And he cannot endure any one, and he pretends to despise Derossi more than all, because he is the head boy; and Garrone, because he is beloved by all.
But Derossi pays no attention to him when he is by; and when the boys tell Garrone that Nobis has been speaking ill of him, he says:-
"His pride is so senseless that it does not deserve even my passing notice."
But Coretti said to him one day, when he was smiling disdainfully at his catskin cap:-
"Go to Derossi for a while, and learn how to play the gentleman!"
Yesterday he complained to the master, because the Calabrian touched his leg with his foot.
The master asked the Calabrian:-
"Did you do it intentionally?
"-"No, sir," he replied, frankly.-"You are too petulant, Nobis."
And Nobis retorted, in his airy way, "I shall tell my father about it."
Then the teacher got angry.
"Your father will tell you that you are in the wrong, as he has on other occasions.
And besides that, it is the teacher alone who has the right to judge and punish in school."
Then he added pleasantly:-
"Come, Nobis, change your ways; be kind and courteous to your comrades.
You see, we have here sons of workingmen and of gentlemen, of the rich and the poor, and all love each other and treat each other like brothers, as they are.
Why do not you do like the rest?
It would not cost you much to make every one like you, and you would be so much happier yourself, too!-Well, have you no reply to make me?"
Nobis, who had listened to him with his customary scornful smile, answered coldly:-
"No, sir."
"Sit down," said the master to him.
"I am sorry for you.
You are a heartless boy."
This seemed to be the end of it all; but the little mason, who sits on the front bench, turned his round face towards Nobis, who sits on the back bench, and made such a fine and ridiculous hare's face at him, that the whole class burst into a shout of laughter.
The master reproved him; but he was obliged to put his hand over his own mouth to conceal a smile.
And even Nobis laughed, but not in a pleasant way.
Monday, 15th.
Nobis can be paired off with Franti: neither of them was affected this morning in the presence of the terrible sight which passed before their eyes.
On coming out of school, I was standing with my father and looking at some big rogues of the second grade, who had thrown themselves on their knees and were wiping off the ice with their cloaks and caps, in order to make slides more quickly, when we saw a crowd of people appear at the end of the street, walking hurriedly, all serious and seemingly terrified, and conversing in low tones.
In the midst of them were three policemen, and behind the policemen two men carrying a litter.
Boys hastened up from all quarters.
The crowd advanced towards us.
On the litter was stretched a man, pale as a corpse, with his head resting on one shoulder, and his hair tumbled and stained with blood, for he had been losing blood through the mouth and ears; and beside the litter walked a woman with a baby in her arms, who seemed crazy, and who shrieked from time to time, "He is dead!
He is dead!
He is dead!"
Behind the woman came a boy who had a portfolio under his arm and who was sobbing.
"What has happened?"
asked my father.
A neighbor replied, that the man was a mason who had fallen from the fourth story while at work.
The bearers of the litter halted for a moment.
Many turned away their faces in horror.
I saw the schoolmistress of the red feather supporting my mistress of the upper first, who was almost in a swoon.
At the same moment I felt a touch on the elbow; it was the little mason, who was ghastly white and trembling from head to foot.
He was certainly thinking of his father.
I was thinking of him, too.
I, at least, am at peace in my mind while I am in school: I know that my father is at home, seated at his table, far removed from all danger; but how many of my companions think that their fathers are at work on a very high bridge or close to the wheels of a machine, and that a movement, a single false step, may cost them their lives!
They are like so many sons of soldiers who have fathers in the battle.
The little mason gazed and gazed, and trembled more and more, and my father noticed it and said:-
"Go home, my boy; go at once to your father, and you will find him safe and tranquil; go!"
The little mason went off, turning round at every step.
And in the meanwhile the crowd had begun to move again, and the woman to shriek in a way that rent the heart, "He is dead!
He is dead!
He is dead!"
"No, no; he is not dead," people on all sides said to her.
But she paid no heed to them, and tore her hair.
Then I heard an indignant voice say, "You are laughing!"
and at the same moment I saw a bearded man staring in Franti's face.
Then the man knocked his cap to the ground with his stick, saying:-
"Uncover your head, you wicked boy, when a man wounded by labor is passing by!"
The crowd had already passed, and a long streak of blood was visible in the middle of the street.
Friday, 17th.
Ah, this is certainly the strangest event of the whole year!
Yesterday morning my father took me to the suburbs of Moncalieri, to look at a villa which he thought of hiring for the coming summer, because we shall not go to Chieri again this year, and it turned out that the person who had the keys was a teacher who acts as secretary to the owner.
He showed us the house, and then he took us to his own room, where he gave us something to drink.
On his table, among the glasses, there was a wooden inkstand, of a conical form, carved in a singular manner.
Perceiving that my father was looking at it, the teacher said:-
"That inkstand is very precious to me: if you only knew, sir, the history of that inkstand!"
And he told it.
Years ago he was a teacher at Turin, and all one winter he went to give lessons to the prisoners in the judicial prison.
He gave the lessons in the chapel of the prison, which is a circular building, and all around it, on the high, bare walls, are a great many little square windows, covered with two cross-bars of iron, each one of which corresponds to a very small cell inside.
He gave his lessons as he paced about the dark, cold chapel, and his scholars stood at the holes, with their copy-books resting against the gratings, showing nothing in the shadow but wan, frowning faces, gray and ragged beards, staring eyes of murderers and thieves.
Among the rest there was one, No.
78, who was more attentive than all the others, and who studied a great deal, and gazed at his teacher with eyes full of respect and gratitude.
He was a young man, with a black beard, more unfortunate than wicked, a cabinet-maker who, in a fit of rage, had flung a plane at his master, who had been persecuting him for some time, and had inflicted a mortal wound on his head: for this he had been condemned to several years of seclusion.
In three months he had learned to read and write, and he read constantly, and the more he learned, the better he seemed to become, and the more remorseful for his crime.
One day, at the conclusion of the lesson, he made a sign to the teacher that he should come near to his little window, and he announced to him that he was to leave Turin on the following day, to go and expiate his crime in the prison at Venice; and as he bade him farewell, he begged in a humble and much moved voice, that he might be allowed to touch the master's hand.
The master offered him his hand, and he kissed it; then he said:-
"Thanks!
thanks!"
and disappeared.
The master drew back his hand; it was bathed with tears.
After that he did not see the man again.
Six years passed.
"I was thinking of anything except that unfortunate man," said the teacher, "when, the other morning, I saw a stranger come to the house, a man with a large black beard already sprinkled with gray, and badly dressed, who said to me: 'Are you the teacher So-and-So, sir?'
'Who are you?'
I asked him.
'I am prisoner No.
78,' he replied; 'you taught me to read and write six years ago; if you recollect, you gave me your hand at the last lesson; I have now expiated my crime, and I have come hither-to beg you to do me the favor to accept a memento of me, a poor little thing which I made in prison.
Will you accept it in memory of me, Signor Master?'
"I stood there speechless.
He thought that I did not wish to take it, and he looked at me as much as to say, 'So six years of suffering are not sufficient to cleanse my hands!'
but with so poignant an expression of pain did he gaze at me, that I instantly extended my hand and took the little object.
This is it."
We looked attentively at the inkstand: it seemed to have been carved with the point of a nail, and with, great patience; on its top was carved a pen lying across a copy-book, and around it was written: " To my teacher.
A memento of No.
78.
Six years! "
And below, in small letters, " Study and hope. "
The master said nothing more; we went away.
But all the way from Moncalieri to Turin I could not get that prisoner, standing at his little window, that farewell to his master, that poor inkstand made in prison, which told so much, out of my head; and I dreamed of them all night, and was still thinking of them this morning-far enough from imagining the surprise which awaited me at school!
No sooner had I taken my new seat, beside Derossi, and written my problem in arithmetic for the monthly examination, than I told my companion the story of the prisoner and the inkstand, and how the inkstand was made, with the pen across the copy-book, and the inscription around it, "Six years!"
Derossi sprang up at these words, and began to look first at me and then at Crossi, the son of the vegetable-vender, who sat on the bench in front, with his back turned to us, wholly absorbed on his problem.
"Hush!"
he said; then, in a low voice, catching me by the arm, "don't you know that Crossi spoke to me day before yesterday of having caught a glimpse; of an inkstand in the hands of his father, who has returned from America; a conical inkstand, made by hand, with a copy-book and a pen,-that is the one; six years!
He said that his father was in America; instead of that he was in prison: Crossi was a little boy at the time of the crime; he does not remember it; his mother has deceived him; he knows nothing; let not a syllable of this escape!"
I remained speechless, with my eyes fixed on Crossi.
Then Derossi solved his problem, and passed it under the bench to Crossi; he gave him a sheet of paper; he took out of his hands the monthly story, Daddy's Nurse, which the teacher had given him to copy out, in order that he might copy it in his stead; he gave him pens, and stroked his shoulder, and made me promise on my honor that I would say nothing to any one; and when we left school, he said hastily to me:-
"His father came to get him yesterday; he will be here again this morning: do as I do."
We emerged into the street; Crossi's father was there, a little to one side: a man with a black beard sprinkled with gray, badly dressed, with a colorless and thoughtful face.
Derossi shook Crossi's hand, in a way to attract attention, and said to him in a loud tone, "Farewell until we meet again, Crossi,"-and passed his hand under his chin.
I did the same.
But as he did so, Derossi turned crimson, and so did I; and Crossi's father gazed attentively at us, with a kindly glance; but through it shone an expression of uneasiness and suspicion which made our hearts grow cold.
(Monthly Story.)
One morning, on a rainy day in March, a lad dressed like a country boy, all muddy and saturated with water, with a bundle of clothes under his arm, presented himself to the porter of the great hospital at Naples, and, presenting a letter, asked for his father.
He had a fine oval face, of a pale brown hue, thoughtful eyes, and two thick lips, always half open, which displayed extremely white teeth.
He came from a village in the neighborhood of Naples.
His father, who had left home a year previously to seek work in France, had returned to Italy, and had landed a few days before at Naples, where, having fallen suddenly ill, he had hardly time to write a line to announce his arrival to his family, and to say that he was going to the hospital.
His wife, in despair at this news, and unable to leave home because she had a sick child, and a baby at the breast, had sent her eldest son to Naples, with a few soldi, to help his father-his daddy, as they called him: the boy had walked ten miles.
The porter, after glancing at the letter, called a nurse and told him to conduct the lad to his father.
"What father?"
inquired the nurse.
The boy, trembling with terror, lest he should hear bad news, gave the name.
The nurse did not recall such a name.
"An old laborer, arrived from abroad?"
he asked.
"Yes, a laborer," replied the lad, still more uneasy; "not so very old.
Yes, arrived from abroad."
"When did he enter the hospital?"
asked the nurse.
The lad glanced at his letter; "Five days ago, I think."
The nurse stood a while in thought; then, as though suddenly recalling him; "Ah!"
he said, "the furthest bed in the fourth ward."
"Is he very ill?
How is he?"
inquired the boy, anxiously.
The nurse looked at him, without replying.
Then he said, "Come with me."
They ascended two flights of stairs, walked to the end of a long corridor, and found themselves facing the open door of a large hall, wherein two rows of beds were arranged.
"Come," repeated the nurse, entering.
The boy plucked up his courage, and followed him, casting terrified glances to right and left, on the pale, emaciated faces of the sick people, some of whom had their eyes closed, and seemed to be dead, while others were staring into the air, with their eyes wide open and fixed, as though frightened.
Some were moaning like children.
The big room was dark, the air was impregnated with an acute odor of medicines.
Two sisters of charity were going about with phials in their hands.
Arrived at the extremity of the great room, the nurse halted at the head of a bed, drew aside the curtains, and said, "Here is your father."
The boy burst into tears, and letting fall his bundle, he dropped his head on the sick man's shoulder, clasping with one hand the arm which was lying motionless on the coverlet.
The sick man did not move.
The boy rose to his feet, and looked at his father, and broke into a fresh fit of weeping.
Then the sick man gave a long look at him, and seemed to recognize him; but his lips did not move.
Poor daddy, how he was changed!
The son would never have recognized him.
His hair had turned white, his beard had grown, his face was swollen, of a dull red hue, with the skin tightly drawn and shining; his eyes were diminished in size, his lips very thick, his whole countenance altered.
There was no longer anything natural about him but his forehead and the arch of his eyebrows.
He breathed with difficulty.
"Daddy!
daddy!"
said the boy, "it is I; don't you know me?
I am Cicillo, your own Cicillo, who has come from the country: mamma has sent me.
Take a good look at me; don't you know me?
Say one word to me."
But the sick man, after having looked attentively at him, closed his eyes.
"Daddy!
daddy!
What is the matter with you?
I am your little son-your own Cicillo."
The sick man made no movement, and continued to breathe painfully.
Then the lad, still weeping, took a chair, seated himself and waited, without taking his eyes from his father's face.
"A doctor will surely come to pay him a visit," he thought; "he will tell me something."
And he became immersed in sad thoughts, recalling many things about his kind father, the day of parting, when he said the last good by to him on board the ship, the hopes which his family had founded on his journey, the desolation of his mother on the arrival of the letter; and he thought of death: he beheld his father dead, his mother dressed in black, the family in misery.
And he remained a long time thus.
A light hand touched him on the shoulder, and he started up: it was a nun.
"What is the matter with my father?"
he asked her quickly.
"Is he your father?"
said the sister gently.
"Yes, he is my father; I have come.
What ails him?"
"Courage, my boy," replied the sister; "the doctor will be here soon now."
And she went away without saying anything more.
Half an hour later he heard the sound of a bell, and he saw the doctor enter at the further end of the hall, accompanied by an assistant; the sister and a nurse followed him.
They began the visit, pausing at every bed.
This time of waiting seemed an eternity to the lad, and his anxiety increased at every step of the doctor.
At length they arrived at the next bed.
The doctor was an old man, tall and stooping, with a grave face.
Before he left the next bed the boy rose to his feet, and when he approached he began to cry.
The doctor looked at him.
"He is the sick man's son," said the sister; "he arrived this morning from the country."
The doctor placed one hand on his shoulder; then bent over the sick man, felt his pulse, touched his forehead, and asked a few questions of the sister, who replied, "There is nothing new."
Then he thought for a while and said, "Continue the present treatment."
Then the boy plucked up courage, and asked in a tearful voice, "What is the matter with my father?"
"Take courage, my boy," replied the doctor, laying his hand on his shoulder once more; "he has erysipelas in his face.
It is a serious case, but there is still hope.
Help him.
Your presence may do him a great deal of good."
"But he does not know me!"
exclaimed the boy in a tone of affliction.
"He will recognize you-to-morrow perhaps.
Let us hope for the best and keep up our courage."
The boy would have liked to ask some more questions, but he did not dare.
The doctor passed on.
And then he began his life of nurse.
As he could do nothing else, he arranged the coverlets of the sick man, touched his hand every now and then, drove away the flies, bent over him at every groan, and when the sister brought him something to drink, he took the glass or the spoon from her hand, and administered it in her stead.
The sick man looked at him occasionally, but he gave no sign of recognition.
However, his glance rested longer on the lad each time, especially when the latter put his handkerchief to his eyes.
Thus passed the first day.
At night the boy slept on two chairs, in a corner of the ward, and in the morning he resumed his work of mercy.
That day it seemed as though the eyes of the sick man revealed a dawning of consciousness.
At the sound of the boy's caressing voice a vague expression of gratitude seemed to gleam for an instant in his pupils, and once he moved his lips a little, as though he wanted to say something.
After each brief nap he seemed, on opening his eyes, to seek his little nurse.
The doctor, who had passed twice, thought he noted a slight improvement.
Towards evening, on putting the cup to his lips, the lad fancied that he perceived a very faint smile glide across the swollen lips.
Then he began to take comfort and to hope; and with the hope of being understood, confusedly at least, he talked to him-talked to him at great length-of his mother, of his little sisters, of his own return home, and he exhorted him to courage with warm and loving words.
And although he often doubted whether he was heard, he still talked; for it seemed to him that even if he did not understand him, the sick man listened with a certain pleasure to his voice,-to that unaccustomed intonation of affection and sorrow.
And in this manner passed the second day, and the third, and the fourth, with vicissitudes of slight improvements and unexpected changes for the worse; and the boy was so absorbed in all his cares, that he hardly nibbled a bit of bread and cheese twice a day, when the sister brought it to him, and hardly saw what was going on around him,-the dying patients, the sudden running up of the sisters at night, the moans and despairing gestures of visitors,-all those doleful and lugubrious scenes of hospital life, which on any other occasion would have disconcerted and alarmed him.
Hours, days, passed, and still he was there with his daddy; watchful, wistful, trembling at every sigh and at every look, agitated incessantly between a hope which relieved his mind and a discouragement which froze his heart.
On the fifth day the sick man suddenly grew worse.
The doctor, on being interrogated, shook his head, as much as to say that all was over, and the boy flung himself on a chair and burst out sobbing.
But one thing comforted him.
In spite of the fact that he was worse, the sick man seemed to be slowly regaining a little intelligence.
He stared at the lad with increasing intentness, and, with an expression which grew in sweetness, would take his drink and medicine from no one but him, and made strenuous efforts with his lips with greater frequency, as though he were trying to pronounce some word; and he did it so plainly sometimes that his son grasped his arm violently, inspired by a sudden hope, and said to him in a tone which was almost that of joy, "Courage, courage, daddy; you will get well, we will go away from here, we will return home with mamma; courage, for a little while longer!"
It was four o'clock in the afternoon, and just when the boy had abandoned himself to one of these outbursts of tenderness and hope, when a sound of footsteps became audible outside the nearest door in the ward, and then a strong voice uttering two words only,-"Farewell, sister!
"-which made him spring to his feet, with a cry repressed in his throat.
At that moment there entered the ward a man with a thick bandage on his hand, followed by a sister.
The boy uttered a sharp cry, and stood rooted to the spot.
The man turned round, looked at him for a moment, and uttered a cry in his turn,-"Cicillo!
"-and darted towards him.
The boy fell into his father's arms, choking with emotion.
The sister, the nurse, and the assistant ran up, and stood there in amazement.
The boy could not recover his voice.
"Oh, my Cicillo!"
exclaimed the father, after bestowing an attentive look on the sick man, as he kissed the boy repeatedly.
"Cicillo, my son, how is this?
They took you to the bedside of another man.
And there was I, in despair at not seeing you after mamma had written, 'I have sent him.'
Poor Cicillo!
How many days have you been here?
How did this mistake occur?
I have come out of it easily!
I have a good constitution, you know!
And how is mamma?
And Concettella?
And the little baby-how are they all?
I am leaving the hospital now.
Come, then.
Oh, Lord God!
Who would have thought it!"
The boy tried to interpolate a few words, to tell the news of the family.
"Oh how happy I am!"
he stammered.
"How happy I am!
What terrible days I have passed!"
And he could not finish kissing his father.
But he did not stir.
"Come," said his father; "we can get home this evening."
And he drew the lad towards him.
The boy turned to look at his patient.
"Well, are you coming or not?"
his father demanded, in amazement.
The boy cast yet another glance at the sick man, who opened his eyes at that moment and gazed intently at him.
Then a flood of words poured from his very soul.
"No, daddy; wait-here-I can't.
Here is this old man.
I have been here for five days.
He gazes at me incessantly.
I thought he was you.
I love him dearly.
He looks at me; I give him his drink; he wants me always beside him; he is very ill now.
Have patience; I have not the courage-I don't know-it pains me too much; I will return home to-morrow; let me stay here a little longer; I don't at all like to leave him.
See how he looks at me!
I don't know who he is, but he wants me; he will die alone: let me stay here, dear daddy!"
"Bravo, little fellow!"
exclaimed the attendant.
The father stood in perplexity, staring at the boy; then he looked at the sick man.
"Who is he?"
he inquired.
"A countryman, like yourself," replied the attendant, "just arrived from abroad, and who entered the hospital on the very day that you entered it.
He was out of his senses when they brought him here, and could not speak.
Perhaps he has a family far away, and sons.
He probably thinks that your son is one of his."
The sick man was still looking at the boy.
The father said to Cicillo, "Stay."
"He will not have to stay much longer," murmured the attendant.
"Stay," repeated his father: "you have heart.
I will go home immediately, to relieve mamma's distress.
Here is a scudo for your expenses.
Good by, my brave little son, until we meet!"
He embraced him, looked at him intently, kissed him again on the brow, and went away.
The boy returned to his post at the bedside, and the sick man appeared consoled.
And Cicillo began again to play the nurse, no longer weeping, but with the same eagerness, the same patience, as before; he again began to give the man his drink, to arrange his bedclothes, to caress his hand, to speak softly to him, to exhort him to courage.
He attended him all that day, all that night; he remained beside him all the following day.
But the sick man continued to grow constantly worse; his face turned a purple color, his breathing grew heavier, his agitation increased, inarticulate cries escaped his lips, the inflammation became excessive.
On his evening visit, the doctor said that he would not live through the night.
And then Cicillo redoubled his cares, and never took his eyes from him for a minute.
The sick man gazed and gazed at him, and kept moving his lips from time to time, with great effort, as though he wanted to say something, and an expression of extraordinary tenderness passed over his eyes now and then, as they continued to grow smaller and more dim.
And that night the boy watched with him until he saw the first rays of dawn gleam white through the windows, and the sister appeared.
The sister approached the bed, cast a glance at the patient, and then went away with rapid steps.
A few moments later she reappeared with the assistant doctor, and with a nurse, who carried a lantern.
"He is at his last gasp," said the doctor.
The boy clasped the sick man's hand.
The latter opened his eyes, gazed at him, and closed them once more.
At that moment the lad fancied that he felt his hand pressed.
"He pressed my hand!"
he exclaimed.
The doctor bent over the patient for an instant, then straightened himself up.
The sister detached a crucifix from the wall.
"He is dead!"
cried the boy.
"Go, my son," said the doctor: "your work of mercy is finished.
Go, and may fortune attend you!
for you deserve it.
God will protect you.
Farewell!"
The sister, who had stepped aside for a moment, returned with a little bunch of violets which she had taken from a glass on the window-sill, and handed them to the boy, saying:-
"I have nothing else to give you.
Take these in memory of the hospital."
"Thanks," returned the boy, taking the bunch of flowers with one hand and drying his eyes with the other; "but I have such a long distance to go on foot-I shall spoil them."
And separating the violets, he scattered them over the bed, saying: "I leave them as a memento for my poor dead man.
Thanks, sister!
thanks, doctor!"
Then, turning to the dead man, "Farewell-" And while he sought a name to give him, the sweet name which he had applied to him for five days recurred to his lips,-"Farewell, poor daddy!"
So saying, he took his little bundle of clothes under his arm, and, exhausted with fatigue, he walked slowly away.
The day was dawning.
Saturday, 18th.
Precossi came last night to remind me that I was to go and see his workshop, which is down the street, and this morning when I went out with my father, I got him to take me there for a moment.
As we approached the shop, Garoffi issued from it on a run, with a package in his hand, and making his big cloak, with which he covers up his merchandise, flutter.
Ah!
now I know where he goes to pilfer iron filings, which he sells for old papers, that barterer of a Garoffi!
When we arrived in front of the door, we saw Precossi seated on a little pile of bricks, engaged in studying his lesson, with his book resting on his knees.
He rose quickly and invited us to enter.
It was a large apartment, full of coal-dust, bristling with hammers, pincers, bars, and old iron of every description; and in one corner burned a fire in a small furnace, where puffed a pair of bellows worked by a boy.
Precossi, the father, was standing near the anvil, and a young man was holding a bar of iron in the fire.
"Ah!
here he is," said the smith, as soon as he caught sight of us, and he lifted his cap, "the nice boy who gives away railway trains!
He has come to see me work a little, has he not?
I shall be at your service in a moment."
And as he said it, he smiled; and he no longer had the ferocious face, the malevolent eyes of former days.
The young man handed him a long bar of iron heated red-hot on one end, and the smith placed it on the anvil.
He was making one of those curved bars for the rail of terrace balustrades.
He raised a large hammer and began to beat it, pushing the heated part now here, now there, between one point of the anvil and the middle, and turning it about in various ways; and it was a marvel to see how the iron curved beneath the rapid and accurate blows of the hammer, and twisted, and gradually assumed the graceful form of a leaf torn from a flower, like a pipe of dough which he had modelled with his hands.
And meanwhile his son watched us with a certain air of pride, as much as to say, "See how my father works!"
"Do you see how it is done, little master?"
the blacksmith asked me, when he had finished, holding out the bar, which looked like a bishop's crosier.
Then he laid it aside, and thrust another into the fire.
"That was very well made, indeed," my father said to him.
And he added, "So you are working-eh!
You have returned to good habits?"
"Yes, I have returned," replied the workman, wiping away the perspiration, and reddening a little.
"And do you know who has made me return to them?"
My father pretended not to understand.
"This brave boy," said the blacksmith, indicating his son with his finger; "that brave boy there, who studied and did honor to his father, while his father rioted, and treated him like a dog.
When I saw that medal-Ah!
thou little lad of mine, no bigger than a soldo of cheese, come hither, that I may take a good look at thy phiz!"
The boy ran to him instantly; the smith took him and set him directly on the anvil, holding him under the arms, and said to him:-
"Polish off the frontispiece of this big beast of a daddy of yours a little!"
And then Precossi covered his father's black face with kisses, until he was all black himself.
"That's as it should be," said the smith, and he set him on the ground again.
"That really is as it should be, Precossi!"
exclaimed my father, delighted.
And bidding the smith and his son good day, he led me away.
As I was going out, little Precossi said to me, "Excuse me," and thrust a little packet of nails into my pocket.
I invited him to come and view the Carnival from my house.
"You gave him your railway train," my father said to me in the street; "but if it had been made of gold and filled with pearls, it would still have been but a petty gift to that sainted son, who has reformed his father's heart."
Monday, 20th.
The whole city is in a tumult over the Carnival, which is nearing its close.
In every square rise booths of mountebanks and jesters; and we have under our windows a circus-tent, in which a little Venetian company, with five horses, is giving a show.
The circus is in the centre of the square; and in one corner there are three very large vans in which the mountebanks sleep and dress themselves,-three small houses on wheels, with their tiny windows, and a chimney in each of them, which smokes continually; and between window and window the baby's swaddling-bands are stretched.
There is one woman who is nursing a child, who prepares the food, and dances on the tight-rope.
Poor people!
The word mountebank is spoken as though it were an insult; but they earn their living honestly, nevertheless, by amusing all the world-and how they work!
All day long they run back and forth between the circus-tent and the vans, in tights, in all this cold; they snatch a mouthful or two in haste, standing, between two performances; and sometimes, when they get their tent full, a wind arises, wrenches away the ropes and extinguishes the lights, and then good by to the show!
They are obliged to return the money, and to work the entire night at repairing their booth.
There are two lads who work; and my father recognized the smallest one as he was traversing the square; and he is the son of the proprietor, the same one whom we saw perform tricks on horseback last year in a circus on the Piazza Vittorio Emanuele.
And he has grown; he must be eight years old: he is a handsome boy, with a round and roguish face, with so many black curls that they escape from his pointed cap.
He is dressed up like a harlequin, decked out in a sort of sack, with sleeves of white, embroidered with black, and his slippers are of cloth.
He is a merry little imp.
He charms every one.
He does everything.
We see him early in the morning, wrapped in a shawl, carrying milk to his wooden house; then he goes to get the horses at the boarding-stable on the Via Bertola.
He holds the tiny baby in his arms; he transports hoops, trestles, rails, ropes; he cleans the vans, lights the fire, and in his leisure moments he always hangs about his mother.
My father is always watching him from the window, and does nothing but talk about him and his family, who have the air of nice people, and of being fond of their children.
One evening we went to the circus: it was cold; there was hardly any one there; but the little harlequin exerted himself greatly to cheer those few people: he executed precarious leaps; he caught hold of the horses' tails; he walked with his legs in the air, all alone; he sang, always with a smile constantly on his handsome little brown face.
And his father, who had on a red vest and white trousers, with tall boots, and a whip in his hand, watched him: but it was melancholy.
My father took pity on him, and spoke of him on the following day to Delis the painter, who came to see us.
These poor people were killing themselves with hard work, and their affairs were going so badly!
The little boy pleased him so much!
What could be done for them?
The painter had an idea.
"Write a fine article for the Gazette," he said: "you know how to write well: relate the miraculous things which the little harlequin does, and I will take his portrait for you.
Everybody reads the Gazette, and people will flock thither for once."
And thus they did.
My father wrote a fine article, full of jests, which told all that we had observed from the window, and inspired a desire to see and caress the little artist; and the painter sketched a little portrait which was graceful and a good likeness, and which was published on Saturday evening.
And behold!
at the Sunday performance a great crowd rushed to the circus.
The announcement was made: Performance for the Benefit of the Little Harlequin, as he was styled in the Gazette.
The circus was crammed; many of the spectators held the Gazette in their hands, and showed it to the little harlequin, who laughed and ran from one to another, perfectly delighted.
The proprietor was delighted also.
Just fancy!
Not a single newspaper had ever done him such an honor, and the money-box was filled.
My father sat beside me.
Among the spectators we found persons of our acquaintance.
Near the entrance for the horses stood the teacher of gymnastics-the one who has been with Garibaldi; and opposite us, in the second row, was the little mason, with his little round face, seated beside his gigantic father; and no sooner did he catch sight of me than he made a hare's face at me.
A little further on I espied Garoffi, who was counting the spectators, and calculated on his fingers how much money the company had taken in.
On one of the chairs in the first row, not far from us, there was also poor Robetti, the boy who saved the child from the omnibus, with his crutches between his knees, pressed close to the side of his father, the artillery captain, who kept one hand on his shoulder.
The performance began.
The little harlequin accomplished wonders on his horse, on the trapeze, on the tight-rope; and every time that he jumped down, every one clapped their hands, and many pulled his curls.
Then several others, rope-dancers, jugglers, and riders, clad in tights, and sparkling with silver, went through their exercises; but when the boy was not performing, the audience seemed to grow weary.
At a certain point I saw the teacher of gymnastics, who held his post at the entrance for the horses, whisper in the ear of the proprietor of the circus, and the latter instantly glanced around, as though in search of some one.
His glance rested on us.
My father perceived it, and understood that the teacher had revealed that he was the author of the article, and in order to escape being thanked, he hastily retreated, saying to me:-
"Remain, Enrico; I will wait for you outside."
After exchanging a few words with his father, the little harlequin went through still another trick: erect upon a galloping horse, he appeared in four characters-as a pilgrim, a sailor, a soldier, and an acrobat; and every time that he passed near me, he looked at me.
And when he dismounted, he began to make the tour of the circus, with his harlequin's cap in his hand, and everybody threw soldi or sugar-plums into it.
I had two soldi ready; but when he got in front of me, instead of offering his cap, he drew it back, gave me a look and passed on.
I was mortified.
Why had he offered me that affront?
The performance came to an end; the proprietor thanked the audience; and all the people rose also, and thronged to the doors.
I was confused by the crowd, and was on the point of going out, when I felt a touch on my hand.
I turned round: it was the little harlequin, with his tiny brown face and his black curls, who was smiling at me; he had his hands full of sugar-plums.
Then I understood.
"Will you accept these sugar-plums from the little harlequin?"
said he to me, in his dialect.
I nodded, and took three or four.
"Then," he added, "please accept a kiss also."
"Give me two," I answered; and held up my face to him.
He rubbed off his floury face with his hand, put his arm round my neck, and planted two kisses on my cheek, saying:-
"There!
take one of them to your father."
Tuesday, 21st.
What a sad scene was that which we witnessed to-day at the procession of the masks!
It ended well; but it might have resulted in a great misfortune.
In the San Carlo Square, all decorated with red, white, and yellow festoons, a vast multitude had assembled; masks of every hue were flitting about; cars, gilded and adorned, in the shape of pavilions; little theatres, barks filled with harlequins and warriors, cooks, sailors, and shepherdesses; there was such a confusion that one knew not where to look; a tremendous clash of trumpets, horns, and cymbals lacerated the ears; and the masks on the chariots drank and sang, as they apostrophized the people in the streets and at the windows, who retorted at the top of their lungs, and hurled oranges and sugar-plums at each other vigorously; and above the chariots and the throng, as far as the eye could reach, one could see banners fluttering, helmets gleaming, plumes waving, gigantic pasteboard heads moving, huge head-dresses, enormous trumpets, fantastic arms, little drums, castanets, red caps, and bottles;-all the world seemed to have gone mad.
When our carriage entered the square, a magnificent chariot was driving in front of us, drawn by four horses covered with trappings embroidered in gold, and all wreathed in artificial roses, upon which there were fourteen or fifteen gentlemen masquerading as gentlemen at the court of France, all glittering with silk, with huge white wigs, a plumed hat, under the arm a small-sword, and a tuft of ribbons and laces on the breast.
They were very gorgeous.
They were singing a French canzonette in concert and throwing sweetmeats to the people, and the people clapped their hands and shouted.
Suddenly, on our left, we saw a man lift a child of five or six above the heads of the crowd,-a poor little creature, who wept piteously, and flung her arms about as though in a fit of convulsions.
The man made his way to the gentlemen's chariot; one of the latter bent down, and the other said aloud:-
"Take this child; she has lost her mother in the crowd; hold her in your arms; the mother may not be far off, and she will catch sight of her: there is no other way."
The gentleman took the child in his arms: all the rest stopped singing; the child screamed and struggled; the gentleman removed his mask; the chariot continued to move slowly onwards.
Meanwhile, as we were afterwards informed, at the opposite extremity of the square a poor woman, half crazed with despair, was forcing her way through the crowd, by dint of shoves and elbowing, and shrieking:-
"Maria!
Maria!
Maria!
I have lost my little daughter!
She has been stolen from me!
They have suffocated my child!"
And for a quarter of an hour she raved and expressed her despair in this manner, straying now a little way in this direction, and then a little way in that, crushed by the throng through which she strove to force her way.
The gentleman on the car was meanwhile holding the child pressed against the ribbons and laces on his breast, casting glances over the square, and trying to calm the poor creature, who covered her face with her hands, not knowing where she was, and sobbed as though she would break her heart.
The gentleman was touched: it was evident that these screams went to his soul.
All the others offered the child oranges and sugar-plums; but she repulsed them all, and grew constantly more convulsed and frightened.
"Find her mother!"
shouted the gentleman to the crowd; "seek her mother!"
And every one turned to the right and the left; but the mother was not to be found.
Finally, a few paces from the place where the Via Roma enters the square, a woman was seen to rush towards the chariot.
Ah, I shall never forget that!
She no longer seemed a human creature: her hair was streaming, her face distorted, her garments torn; she hurled herself forward with a rattle in her throat,-one knew not whether to attribute it to either joy, anguish, or rage,-and darted out her hands like two claws to snatch her child.
The chariot halted.
"Here she is," said the gentleman, reaching out the child after kissing it; and he placed her in her mother's arms, who pressed her to her breast like a fury.
But one of the tiny hands rested a second longer in the hands of the gentleman; and the latter, pulling off of his right hand a gold ring set with a large diamond, and slipping it with a rapid movement upon the finger of the little girl, said:-
"Take this; it shall be your marriage dowry."
The mother stood rooted to the spot, as though enchanted; the crowd broke into applause; the gentleman put on his mask again, his companions resumed their song, and the chariot started on again slowly, amid a tempest of hand-clapping and hurrahs.
Thursday, 24th.
The master is very ill, and they have sent in his stead the master of the fourth grade, who has been a teacher in the Institute for the Blind.
He is the oldest of all the instructors, with hair so white that it looks like a wig made of cotton, and he speaks in a peculiar manner, as though he were chanting a melancholy song; but he does it well, and he knows a great deal.
No sooner had he entered the schoolroom than, catching sight of a boy with a bandage on his eye, he approached the bench, and asked him what was the matter.
"Take care of your eyes, my boy," he said to him.
And then Derossi asked him:-
"Is it true, sir, that you have been a teacher of the blind?"
"Yes, for several years," he replied.
And Derossi said, in a low tone, "Tell us something about it."
The master went and seated himself at his table.
Coretti said aloud, "The Institute for the Blind is in the Via Nizza."
"You say blind-blind," said the master, "as you would say poor or ill, or I know not what.
But do you thoroughly comprehend the significance of that word?
Reflect a little.
Blind!
Never to see anything!
Not to be able to distinguish the day from night; to see neither the sky, nor sun, nor your parents, nor anything of what is around you, and which you touch; to be immersed in a perpetual obscurity, and as though buried in the bowels of the earth!
Make a little effort to close your eyes, and to think of being obliged to remain forever thus; you will suddenly be overwhelmed by a mental agony, by terror; it will seem to you impossible to resist, that you must burst into a scream, that you must go mad or die.
But, poor boys!
when you enter the Institute of the Blind for the first time, during their recreation hour, and hear them playing on violins and flutes in all directions, and talking loudly and laughing, ascending and descending the stairs at a rapid pace, and wandering freely through the corridors and dormitories, you would never pronounce these unfortunates to be the unfortunates that they are.
It is necessary to observe them closely.
There are lads of sixteen or eighteen, robust and cheerful, who bear their blindness with a certain ease, almost with hardihood; but you understand from a certain proud, resentful expression of countenance that they must have suffered tremendously before they became resigned to this misfortune.
"There are others, with sweet and pallid faces, on which a profound resignation is visible; but they are sad, and one understands that they must still weep at times in secret.
Ah, my sons!
reflect that some of them have lost their sight in a few days, some after years of martyrdom and many terrible chirurgical operations, and that many were born so,-born into a night that has no dawn for them, that they entered into the world as into an immense tomb, and that they do not know what the human countenance is like.
Picture to yourself how they must have suffered, and how they must still suffer, when they think thus confusedly of the tremendous difference between themselves and those who see, and ask themselves, 'Why this difference, if we are not to blame?'
"I who have spent many years among them, when I recall that class, all those eyes forever sealed, all those pupils without sight and without life, and then look at the rest of you, it seems impossible to me that you should not all be happy.
Think of it!
there are about twenty-six thousand blind persons in Italy!
Twenty-six thousand persons who do not see the light-do you understand?
An army which would employ four hours in marching past our windows."
The master paused.
Not a breath was audible in all the school.
Derossi asked if it were true that the blind have a finer sense of feeling than the rest of us.
The master said: "It is true.
All the other senses are finer in them, because, since they must replace, among them, that of sight, they are more and better exercised than they are in the case of those who see.
In the morning, in the dormitory, one asks another, 'Is the sun shining?'
and the one who is the most alert in dressing runs instantly into the yard, and flourishes his hands in the air, to find out whether there is any warmth of the sun perceptible, and then he runs to communicate the good news, 'The sun is shining!'
From the voice of a person they obtain an idea of his height.
We judge of a man's soul by his eyes; they, by his voice.
They remember intonations and accents for years.
They perceive if there is more than one person in a room, even if only one speaks, and the rest remain motionless.
They know by their touch whether a spoon is more or less polished.
Little girls distinguish dyed wools from that which is of the natural color.
As they walk two and two along the streets, they recognize nearly all the shops by their odors, even those in which we perceive no odor.
They spin top, and by listening to its humming they go straight to it and pick it up without any mistake.
They trundle hoop, play at ninepins, jump the rope, build little houses of stones, pick violets as though they saw them, make mats and baskets, weaving together straw of various colors rapidly and well-to such a degree is their sense of touch skilled.
The sense of touch is their sight.
One of their greatest pleasures is to handle, to grasp, to guess the forms of things by feeling them.
It is affecting to see them when they are taken to the Industrial Museum, where they are allowed to handle whatever they please, and to observe with what eagerness they fling themselves on geometrical bodies, on little models of houses, on instruments; with what joy they feel over and rub and turn everything about in their hands, in order to see how it is made.
They call this seeing !"
Garoffi interrupted the teacher to inquire if it was true that blind boys learn to reckon better than others.
The master replied: "It is true.
They learn to reckon and to write.
They have books made on purpose for them, with raised characters; they pass their fingers over these, recognize the letters and pronounce the words.
They read rapidly; and you should see them blush, poor little things, when they make a mistake.
And they write, too, without ink.
They write on a thick and hard sort of paper with a metal bodkin, which makes a great many little hollows, grouped according to a special alphabet; these little punctures stand out in relief on the other side of the paper, so that by turning the paper over and drawing their fingers across these projections, they can read what they have written, and also the writing of others; and thus they write compositions: and they write letters to each other.
They write numbers in the same way, and they make calculations; and they calculate mentally with an incredible facility, since their minds are not diverted by the sight of surrounding objects, as ours are.
And if you could see how passionately fond they are of reading, how attentive they are, how well they remember everything, how they discuss among themselves, even the little ones, of things connected with history and language, as they sit four or five on the same bench, without turning to each other, and converse, the first with the third, the second with the fourth, in a loud voice and all together, without losing a single word, so acute and prompt is their hearing.
"And they attach more importance to the examinations than you do, I assure you, and they are fonder of their teachers.
They recognize their teacher by his step and his odor; they perceive whether he is in a good or bad humor, whether he is well or ill, simply by the sound of a single word of his.
They want the teacher to touch them when he encourages and praises them, and they feel of his hand and his arms in order to express their gratitude.
And they love each other and are good comrades to each other.
In play time they are always together, according to their wont.
In the girls' school, for instance, they form into groups according to the instrument on which they play,-violinists, pianists, and flute-players,-and they never separate.
When they have become attached to any one, it is difficult for them to break it off.
They take much comfort in friendship.
They judge correctly among themselves.
They have a clear and profound idea of good and evil.
No one grows so enthusiastic as they over the narration of a generous action, of a grand deed."
Votini inquired if they played well.
"They are ardently fond of music," replied the master.
"It is their delight: music is their life.
Little blind children, when they first enter the Institute, are capable of standing three hours perfectly motionless, to listen to playing.
They learn easily; they play with fire.
When the teacher tells one of them that he has not a talent for music, he feels very sorrowful, but he sets to studying desperately.
Ah!
if you could hear the music there, if you could see them when they are playing, with their heads thrown back a smile on their lips, their faces aflame, trembling with emotion, in ecstasies at listening to that harmony which replies to them in the obscurity which envelops them, you would feel what a divine consolation is music!
And they shout for joy, they beam with happiness when a teacher says to them, "You will become an artist."
The one who is first in music, who succeeds the best on the violin or piano, is like a king to them; they love, they venerate him.
If a quarrel arises between two of them, they go to him; if two friends fall out, it is he who reconciles them.
The smallest pupils, whom he teaches to play, regard him as a father.
Then all go to bid him good night before retiring to bed.
And they talk constantly of music.
They are already in bed, late at night, wearied by study and work, and half asleep, and still they are discussing, in a low tone, operas, masters, instruments, and orchestras.
It is so great a punishment for them to be deprived of the reading, or lesson in music, it causes them such sorrow that one hardly ever has the courage to punish them in that way.
That which the light is to our eyes, music is to their hearts."
Derossi asked whether we could not go to see them.

Yes, replied the teacher;
but you boys must not go there now.
You shall go there later on, when you are in a condition to appreciate the whole extent of this misfortune, and to feel all the compassion which it merits.
It is a sad sight, my boys.
You will sometimes see there boys seated in front of an open window, enjoying the fresh air, with immovable countenances, which seem to be gazing at the wide green expanse and the beautiful blue mountains which you can see; and when you remember that they see nothing - that they will never see anything - of that vast loveliness, your soul is oppressed, as though you had yourselves become blind at that moment.
And then there are those who were born blind, who, as they have never seen the world, do not complain because they do not possess the image of anything, and who, therefore, arouse less compassion.
But there are lads who have been blind but a few months, who still recall everything, who thoroughly understand all that they have lost; and these have, in addition, the grief of feeling their minds obscured, the dearest images grow a little more dim in their minds day by day, of feeling the persons whom they have loved the most die out of their memories.
One of these boys said to me one day, with inexpressible sadness, I should like to have my sight again, only for a moment, in order to see mammas face once more, for I no longer remember it!
And when their mothers come to see them, the boys place their hands on her face; they feel her over thoroughly from brow to chin, and her ears, to see how they are made, and they can hardly persuade themselves that they cannot see her, and they call her by name many times, to beseech her that she will allow them, that she will make them see her just once.
How many, even hard-hearted men, go away in tears!
And when you do go out, your case seems to you to be the exception, and the power to see people, houses, and the sky a hardly deserved privilege.
Oh! there is not one of you, I am sure, who, on emerging thence, would not feel disposed to deprive himself of a portion of his own sight, in order to bestow a gleam at least upon all those poor children, for whom the sun has no light, for whom a mother has no face!
Saturday, 25th.
Yesterday afternoon, on coming out of school, I went to pay a visit to my sick master.
He made himself ill by overworking.
Five hours of teaching a day, then an hour of gymnastics, then two hours more of evening school, which is equivalent to saying but little sleep, getting his food by snatches, and working breathlessly from morning till night.
He has ruined his health.
That is what my mother says.
My mother was waiting for me at the big door; I came out alone, and on the stairs I met the teacher with the black beard-Coatti,-the one who frightens every one and punishes no one.
He stared at me with wide-open eyes, and made his voice like that of a lion, in jest, but without laughing.
I was still laughing when I pulled the bell on the fourth floor; but I ceased very suddenly when the servant let me into a wretched, half-lighted room, where my teacher was in bed.
He was lying in a little iron bed.
His beard was long.
He put one hand to his brow in order to see better, and exclaimed in his affectionate voice:-
"Oh, Enrico!"
I approached the bed; he laid one hand on my shoulder and said:-
"Good, my boy.
You have done well to come and see your poor teacher.
I am reduced to a sad state, as you see, my dear Enrico.
And how fares the school?
How are your comrades getting along?
All well, eh?
Even without me?
You do very well without your old master, do you not?"
I was on the point of saying "no"; he interrupted me.
"Come, come, I know that you do not hate me!"
and he heaved a sigh.
I glanced at some photographs fastened to the wall.
"Do you see?"
he said to me.
"All of them are of boys who gave me their photographs more than twenty years ago.
They were good boys.
These are my souvenirs.
When I die, my last glance will be at them; at those roguish urchins among whom my life has been passed.
You will give me your portrait, also, will you not, when you have finished the elementary course?"
Then he took an orange from his nightstand, and put it in my hand.
"I have nothing else to give you," he said; "it is the gift of a sick man."
I looked at it, and my heart was sad; I know not why.
"Attend to me," he began again.
"I hope to get over this; but if I should not recover, see that you strengthen yourself in arithmetic, which is your weak point; make an effort.
It is merely a question of a first effort: because sometimes there is no lack of aptitude; there is merely an absence of a fixed purpose-of stability, as it is called."
But in the meantime he was breathing hard; and it was evident that he was suffering.
"I am feverish," he sighed; "I am half gone; I beseech you, therefore, apply yourself to arithmetic, to problems.
If you don't succeed at first, rest a little and begin afresh.
And press forward, but quietly without fagging yourself, without straining your mind.
Go!
My respects to your mamma.
And do not mount these stairs again.
We shall see each other again in school.
And if we do not, you must now and then call to mind your master of the third grade, who was fond of you."
I felt inclined to cry at these words.
"Bend down your head," he said to me.
I bent my head to his pillow; he kissed my hair.
Then he said to me, "Go!"
and turned his face towards the wall.
And I flew down the stairs; for I longed to embrace my mother.
Saturday, 25th.
I was watching you from the window this afternoon, when you were on your way home from the master's; you came in collision with a woman.
Take more heed to your manner of walking in the street.
There are duties to be fulfilled even there.
If you keep your steps and gestures within bounds in a private house, why should you not do the same in the street, which is everybody's house.
Remember this, Enrico.
Every time that you meet a feeble old man, a poor person, a woman with a child in her arms, a cripple with his crutches, a man bending beneath a burden, a family dressed in mourning, make way for them respectfully.
We must respect age, misery, maternal love, infirmity, labor, death.
Whenever you see a person on the point of being run down by a vehicle, drag him away, if it is a child; warn him, if he is a man; always ask what ails the child who is crying all alone; pick up the aged man's cane, when he lets it fall.
If two boys are fighting, separate them; if it is two men, go away: do not look on a scene of brutal violence, which offends and hardens the heart.
And when a man passes, bound, and walking between a couple of policemen, do not add your curiosity to the cruel curiosity of the crowd; he may be innocent.
Cease to talk with your companion, and to smile, when you meet a hospital litter, which is, perhaps, bearing a dying person, or a funeral procession; for one may issue from your own home on the morrow.
Look with reverence upon all boys from the asylums, who walk two and two,-the blind, the dumb, those afflicted with the rickets, orphans, abandoned children; reflect that it is misfortune and human charity which is passing by.
Always pretend not to notice any one who has a repulsive or laughter-provoking deformity.
Always extinguish every match that you find in your path; for it may cost some one his life.
Always answer a passer-by who asks you the way, with politeness.
Do not look at any one and laugh; do not run without necessity; do not shout.
Respect the street.
The education of a people is judged first of all by their behavior on the street.
Where you find offences in the streets, there you will find offences in the houses.
And study the streets; study the city in which you live.
If you were to be hurled far away from it to-morrow, you would be glad to have it clearly present in your memory, to be able to traverse it all again in memory.
Your own city, and your little country-that which has been for so many years your world; where you took your first steps at your mother's side; where you experienced your first emotions, opened your mind to its first ideas; found your first friends.
It has been a mother to you: it has taught you, loved you, protected you.
Study it in its streets and in its people, and love it; and when you hear it insulted, defend it.
THY FATHER.