What Is a Tsunami?
A tsunami is a huge wave that can flood the land with devastating effects.
The word tsunami is Japanese for “harbour wave.”
It is an appropriate name since it is when a tsunami hits a harbor or other area used by people that its destructive power is felt.
A tsunami can flood towns and villages with little warning, destroying all in its path and killing people and animals.
When the wave retreats, everything can be swept out to sea.
Tsunamis through time
Tsunamis have probably been around as long as the sea.
One of the earliest descriptions was left by the Greek historian Thucydides, who described a tsunami in the Mediterranean Sea near Greece in 426 BCE: “The sea... returned in a huge wave and invaded a great part of the town, and retreated, leaving some of it still underwater; so that what was once land is now sea; such of the inhabitants perishing as could not run up to the higher ground in time.”
Thucydides linked the tsunami to recent earthquakes in the area - modern scientists would do the same.
 ▲ A tsunami floods houses in Oahu, Hawaii, in 1957.
What causes tsunamis?
Tsunamis are caused by a disturbance in or under the sea that makes a large volume of water move suddenly.
Most are caused by earthquakes - though landslides, volcanic eruptions, and even meteorites falling into the sea can cause tsunamis.
Waves flow outward in a circle from the point where the disturbance happens - like ripples spreading from a stone dropped in a pond.
 ▲ A tsunami can have devastating effects if it strikes an area where people live and work.
CASE STUDY
When the sea and sky fell
Modern geologists point to evidence of a tsunami caused by a meteorite striking the Tasman Sea between 500 and 850 years ago.
This may explain a legend told by the people of Burragorang in New South Wales, Australia.
One steamy, hot night, the people lay unable to sleep in their camp.
Just after sunset, the sky shuddered, heaved, and tumbled, crashing down on them.
The Milky Way split and stars fell - including a gigantic, burning blue star that tore the ground apart, showering the people with chunks of earth and rock.
Later, other tribes told of the whole ocean falling on them from above.
It then rained for weeks, and the whole land was flooded.
The native peoples believed these events were caused by an angry ancestor in the sky.
The Tsunami Zone
Tsunamis can happen anywhere, but most occur around the Pacific Ocean.
Volcanic eruptions and earthquakes are very common around the edges of the Pacific, both inland and just off the coast, and these can trigger tsunamis that spread across the whole ocean.
Inland tsunamis
Tsunamis can even happen in an inland sea or lake.
Many tsunamis have formed in the Mediterranean Sea, which is mostly enclosed by Europe and North Africa.
Earthquakes and volcanic activity around Italy and Greece have caused some disastrous tsunamis through history, including some believed to have destroyed ancient Greek and Minoan cities thousands of years ago.
Smaller bodies of water, such as lakes and rivers, can also be affected by tsunamis.
In 2011, the severe earthquake that struck Japan caused a tsunami that flowed up many rivers, causing damage far inland from the coast.
The eruption of Mount St. Helens in Washington State in 1980 caused a tsunami on nearby Spirit Lake.
 ▲ The Ring of Fire is a zone prone to earthquakes and volcanic eruptions that circles the Pacific Ocean.
Landfall
A tsunami can strike land a long way from the event that causes it–even on the other side of the ocean.
In 1946, a tsunami that struck the Hawaiian Islands in the middle of the Pacific Ocean was caused by an earthquake in the Aleutian Trench, off the coast of Alaska, five hours earlier.
The earthquake was over 2,400 miles (4,000 kilometers) from Hawaii.
When a tsunami strikes a region that didn’t feel the earthquake, it can seem to come from nowhere.
When it reaches the shore quickly and near to the source of the earthquake or eruption, it brings new devastation to an area hit only minutes before.
EARTH’S JIGSAW PUZZLE
The surface, or crust, of the Earth is divided into chunks called tectonic plates that fit together in a giant jigsaw puzzle.
The crust is made up of seven large plates and several smaller ones.
The Pacific Ocean is held on a single vast plate.
Within the earth, semi-liquid, red-hot rock moves very slowly around the globe, dragging the plates with it.
At the joins between plates, they rub or push against each other.
These are geologically active areas where earthquakes and volcanic eruptions happen.
Earthquakes and Tsunamis
The earth’s tectonic plates move slowly - about the same speed as your fingernails grow.
But where the plates push or grind together, pressure can build up over years or centuries.
When the tension becomes too great, the plates slip with a jolt, causing an earthquake.
Earthquake area
At the edges of the ocean, the ocean plate pushes against the plates carrying land.
Since the ocean plate is denser than the continental plates, the oceanic plate is forced downward at pressure.
It melts, and some of it goes down to be reabsorbed into the earth’s mantle, but some rises to feed volcanoes.
Sometimes a piece of plate may be snapped off or flicked upward making an earthquake.
More than 80 percent of the tsunamis in the Pacific over the last 2,000 years have been caused by earthquakes.
 ▲ At the edges of the ocean, the earth’s crust, carrying the sea, is pushed down below the edge of the continent.
Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions are common in these areas.
Filling the gap
When the earth’s crust under the sea suddenly slips, a massive column of water may fall quickly downward, rushing in to fill a gap, or it may be rapidly thrust upward.
Under gravity, the water immediately evens out, correcting itself to regain a smooth surface.
As it does so, a series of massive waves is thrown out.
If an earthquake happens on land but near the coast, ripples of energy, just like waves on water but moving more slowly, run through the solid ground.
When they meet the sea, the waves are transferred to waves in the water.
Some quite small earthquakes on land translate into gigantic and dangerous tsunamis.
CASE STUDY
Lisbon, 1755
On November 1, 1755, Lisbon, Portugal, was rocked by one of the most powerful earthquakes in recorded history.
Lasting 10 minutes, it measured 9.0 on the Richter scale (a scale for measuring earthquake intensity) and demolished much of the city.
People fled to the beach to escape falling buildings, but when a huge tsunami struck minutes later, many were killed.
The tsunami also affected other parts of Europe and even reached North Africa and the Caribbean.
A third of the population of Lisbon died and more than 100,000 people in total.
Modern earthquake research began with this disaster.
Volcanoes and Tsunamis
The very same areas that are plagued by earthquakes also suffer volcanic eruptions.
As the oceanic crust is forced downward, it melts underground.
Some rises through the earth’s upper layer to swell vast magma chambers beneath volcanoes.
When a volcano can hold no more, the magma is hurled out under pressure, making an eruption.
Scalding molten rock explodes into the air, sometimes blowing away part of the volcano itself.
When the magma chamber has emptied, the weight of the mountain above often comes crashing down into the empty space, causing the volcano to collapse inward.
Water and fire
If a volcano is on the coast or is an island in the sea, water and molten rock make an explosive mixture.
Water rushing into the magma chamber often causes an explosion so violent the volcano is blown apart, and the sudden movement of a large volume of water can cause a tsunami.
A tsunami may also happen if huge chunks of rock are thrown into the sea by an eruption.
Many volcanoes are completely underwater.
An undersea eruption can force a column of water upward or the seafloor can collapse into an emptying magma chamber.
Either event can cause a tsunami.
 ▲ A volcanic eruption in Soufrière Hills, Montserrat, in 1997.
Eruptions in this area have often started tsunamis.
Combined assault
Earth tremors - minor earthquakes - can be the first sign that a volcano is about to erupt.
Either the earth tremors or the eruption itself can cause a tsunami, and often an area will be devastated by more than one disaster in a short time.
 ▲ The Greek island of Thera (Santorini) as it may have looked before 1410 BCE, when its volcano exploded, and as it looks now.
CASE STUDY
Krakatau, 1883
The Indonesian island of Krakatau blew apart in a massive volcanic eruption in August 1883.
After months of activity, a fissure opened up in the volcano and seawater poured in.
When the water met hot, molten rock, the whole island exploded.
As the sea rushed into the gaping hole where the island had been, a huge tsunami swept the area, larger than any seen before.
About 36,000 people died around the coasts of surrounding lands.
Boats were carried far inshore, and buildings were swept out to sea.
Rafts of volcanic rock, ripped up trees, debris, and dead bodies floated for months, traveling as far as the coast of Africa.
Watery Buildup
A tsunami may start far out at sea or near the coast.
In the area of the Ring of Fire, volcanic eruptions and earthquakes often occur near the coast.
An earthquake underwater makes a series of waves that travel outwards in a circle from the epicenter (starting point) of the quake, like ripples from a stone dropped in a pond or like the waves pushed out of the way by a surfacing submarine.
On the side nearest the shore, the waves reach land quickly - often before people living in the area can be warned.
The wave that strikes the coast nearby is called a local tsunami.
But waves travel outward in all directions, and some cross the ocean to hit land many hundreds or even thousands of miles away - a distant tsunami.
Starting small
Far out at sea, the tsunami is a tiny wave but can travel as fast as a commercial jet - over 450 miles (750 kilometers) per hour.
The height of the wave may be only two feet (0.6 meter), and so it often goes unnoticed by ships in the area.
As the tsunami approaches land and the water gets shallower, the wave slows down and grows much taller.
By the time it reaches the shore, it can be 100 feet (30 meters) tall or even taller and slow to 30 miles (50 kilometers) per hour.
As much as a thousand tons of water can hit each yard of coastline.
 ▲ When it is far out at sea, a tsunami is small but moves quickly.
As it approaches shore, it slows down and grows much taller.
Spot a tsunami
Normal wave
Tsunami
Speed 4.8 - 60 miles per hour 480 - 600 miles per hour
Wave period (time between two waves) 5 - 20 seconds 10 minutes to 2 hours
Wave length (distance between two waves) 330 - 660 feet 60 - 300 miles
WHY DOES A TSUNAMI GROW SO TALL?
The energy of the wave remains much the same, just dropping slightly as the wave travels, because of friction with the seabed.
When the wave is out at sea, the energy is dispersed through the whole depth of the wave, but as the water becomes shallower near the coast, the water is forced upward by the compressed energy.
Minute by Minute
A tsunami can bring total devastation in just a few terrifying minutes.
The most destructive tsunamis are those that strike without warning since most people only need about 10 minutes to move to safety if they know a tsunami is on its way.
In some cases, the sea draws back before the tsunami strikes and sometimes before it is even visible.
This is the wave pulling the sea into itself.
On the shore, old shipwrecks may be revealed.
Fish may be stranded on the beach.
People are often killed because they rush to pick up the fish.
There may be a hissing and cracking sound or a rumble like thunder as the tsunami approaches.
 ▲ The ocean receding from the coast of Kalutara, Sri Lanka, during the tsunami that struck in December 2004.
Flooding
A tsunami is rarely a big breaking wave.
Instead, the sea level swells and rises, and a flood washes in over the land.
Froth and breaking waves come from the flood hitting features of the landscape and buildings and from water falling over walls and through windows.
The behavior of the wave depends very much on the shape and geographical features of the coastline.
If lots of areas of coastline are exposed, with inlets and promontories, a complex pattern of flooding can occur, with water coming in several directions.
Sometimes a river can funnel a wave far inland or a harbour can trap a wave so that it bounces backward and forward off the harbor walls.
 ▲ The tsunami flooding over Koh Racha Island, south of Phuket, Thailand, in December 2004.
Wave after wave
Tsunamis are really a “wave train” with more waves following the first at an interval of anything from five to 90 minutes.
People sometimes return to the area after the first wave, thinking the tsunami is over.
They may then be killed or swept away by the next wave, which is often bigger than the first.
CRASHING WAVE
Very rarely a tsunami can arrive as a giant breaking wave, called a bore.
This is a vertical wave with a churning front.
Bores are extremely destructive because of the force with which they pound the land.
A bore may occur if the tsunami comes from deep water into a shallow bay or river.
Human Catastrophe
A tsunami can wreak terrible devastation if it strikes a populated area.
In some of the areas in the Pacific that are frequently hit by tsunamis, many people live by fishing and spend their whole lives on the shore, in the danger area.
Tourist areas are also clustered along the coastlines.
Death and destruction
Drowning is not the only risk a tsunami brings.
People may be thrown against hard objects by the force of the water, crushed by falling buildings, or hit by debris carried on the flood.
They may be dragged out to sea as the tsunami recedes.
Survivors can suffer terrible consequences if their homes and livelihoods are wrecked and their communities destroyed.
When the waters drop, the danger is far from over.
Many of the countries where tsunamis occur are tropical or semi-tropical.
Disease spreads quickly in hot, wet conditions.
With no sanitation or clean water and often with the dead bodies of people and animals lying unburied on land and in the water, cholera, diphtheria, typhoid, dysentery, and other deadly diseases quickly take hold and spread.
Disease can kill as many people as the tsunami itself.
 ▲ Survivors of the tsunami in 2004 view the wreckage of their home in Nagapattinam, India.
Cut off
Often roads, harbors, and runways are swept away or rendered useless by flooding.
They may be filled with debris or the surfaces destroyed.
This makes it very difficult for aid to reach the stricken area and for injured people to be taken to safety.
There may be no drinking water, food, emergency shelter, or medical supplies for several days, especially in remote areas.
 ▲ A village near the coast of Sumatra, Indonesia, lies in ruins after being destroyed by the 2004 tsunami.
CASE STUDY
Indian Ocean, 2004
On December 26, 2004, an earthquake in the Indian Ocean off the northwest coast of the Indonesian island of Sumatra caused the most devastating tsunami in human history.
The earthquake released as much energy as 23,000 atomic bombs.
Nearly 300,000 people were killed or reported missing, most of them in Sumatra, Thailand, Sri Lanka, and India, and more than a million people became homeless.
The area was left with destroyed communities and land that cannot be used, because it was scattered with wreckage and stripped of vegetation.
Waves from the tsunami were detected as far away as Antarctica and the coast of South America.
Helping Out
People struck by a tsunami need help immediately and for months or years afterward.
After the emergency services have rescued people who are trapped, injured, or drifting in the sea, the next job is to provide food, shelter, water, and medical help.
After that, the work of rebuilding lives and communities must begin.
Emergency services
Police, coast guards, ambulance, and fire services may all be involved in emergency relief.
They are needed to rescue people from the water, from trees and rooftops where they have taken refuge, and from under debris and inside collapsed buildings.
They must also take on the grim task of removing dead bodies.
If the tsunami is large and affects a wide area, local services may not be able to cope or may be put out of action themselves.
International aid can step in, with expert emergency teams, assistance from the armed forces, and charity or aid workers.
If some areas are cut off by water or by piles of debris, clearing routes to and within the disaster area is a crucial early stage of relief work.
Many ordinary people in the area may join the rescue efforts.
Even without expert knowledge, they can give crucial help in finding people and helping them to safety.
 ▲ An injured tsunami victim is helped to a U.S. Navy helicopter in Banda Aceh, Indonesia, to be taken to hospital.
Keeping in touch
If local communication links are destroyed, radio, mobile phones, and computers with wireless Internet links are a crucial means of keeping in touch.
In the Indian Ocean tsunami of 2004, survivors, volunteer helpers, and aid workers used text messages to guide rescuers to trapped victims.
They used blogs - diaries kept on a website - to keep the outside world updated.
 ▲ Temporary homes on stilts house survivors of the tsunami in the Indian Ocean in 2004.
CASE STUDY
Rescue, aid and rebuilding
Following the Indian Ocean tsunami of December 26, 2004, international emergency teams arrived quickly.
The immediate aid needed in the area was water purification units, tents, medicines, food - especially baby food - and skilled medical staff.
Money was donated by countries around the world, by individuals giving to charities, and by international organizations such as the World Bank.
A total of $7 billion was promised in the first month.
The estimated cost of cleaning up and rebuilding is more than $13 billion over several years.
Terrible Aftermath
The effects of a major tsunami can last years or even decades.
For people who have lost family members, the effects last a lifetime.
In addition to the personal tragedies, the loss of communities, buildings, farmland and forest, and changes to the coast, often cause financial disaster, increasing the trauma for survivors.
Personal tragedies
A tsunami can kill large proportions of the local population, and many people may lose a number of family members and friends.
Often people are missing with no body ever recovered, and many bodies that are recovered are not identifiable.
Orphaned children or those separated from their parents must be reunited with family members.
With children too small or traumatized to communicate, this can be very difficult.
After the tsunami of 2004, photos taken with digital cameras and mobile phones were posted on the web or made into wall displays in local hospitals.
These photos helped to identify lost survivors and bodies that had been recovered.
 ▲ In Phuket, Thailand, survivors pick their way through the chaos after the 2004 tsunami.
Broken communities
In some places, too few people are left alive to rebuild a community.
In the Indian Ocean tsunami, many more women than men died, and local communities had to adapt to different social structures after the event.
A tsunami commonly destroys buildings, farms, fishing grounds, forests, roads and other amenities, and natural areas that are vital to people living in the area.
In the aftermath, many people cannot make a living and may have no home or shelter.
The devastation can have a financial impact for many years.
National and international aid is used to help people rebuild homes and establish a livelihood in the wrecked environment.
 ▲ After the disaster, wall displays of photographs helped to identify people lost or killed during the tsunami in 2004.
CASE STUDY
Papua New Guinea, 1998
On July 17, 1998, a 33-foot (10-meter) high tsunami swept across a spit of land in Papua New Guinea with devastating results for the 10,000 inhabitants and their homes.
The wave arrived without warning, following an earthquake only 18 miles (30 kilometers) away.
Many of the victims were children, playing near the beaches during the school vacation.
The community faces a difficult future with a whole generation lost.
Raymond Nimis, a survivor, described what happened: “I felt the earthquake rocking the house.
It was dark.
Then we heard the sea break.
I saw it, very huge; we tried to run, but it was too late.”
Environmental Impact
After a tsunami, the first concern is to help people.
The impact on the environment is usually a secondary worry - but it can be closely bound up with the lives of local people, especially in areas where most live from fishing or farming.
Devastation in the sea
The sea soon looks calm again after the tsunami has receded, but disastrous effects may be hidden beneath the surface.
A tsunami can smash coral reefs apart, destroying the local marine habitat.
Displaced rocks and coral are a peril to fishermen who once knew the shape of the land under the sea.
Rafts of debris washed from the land often include the dead bodies of people and animals.
They clog bays and harbors and float far out to sea.
The bodies may block the flow of rivers into the sea, and as they decay, they may pollute the water or poison marine life.
Pollution from damaged industrial sites on the coast poses a further danger to fish and seabirds.
 ▲ Lituya Bay in Alaska, 14 years after the largest tsunami ever recorded devastated the area in 1958.
GROWING BACK
Nature is remarkably resilient, and plants and animals soon return to a devastated region.
Although whole forests may be swept away by a tsunami, fast-growing trees start to reappear within a year or two and animals start to move back in.
Under the sea, repair is slower.
It may take centuries for coral reefs to grow back after a major tsunami.
Sometimes objects washed into the sea can aid regrowth: corals and fish may start to inhabit the debris as an artificial reef, and it eventually becomes part of the rebuilt reef.
Inland destruction
Damage on land is more obvious.
A wide area may be littered with debris; forests may be flattened and farmland flooded.
Not all harm is visible, though.
Salt water or pollution flooding fields may make them unusable for farming for years.
Soil is often eroded or washed away, making the land unusable by people or animals.
 ▲ Trees were felled and forests destroyed near Ban Nam Khen village in Thailand in December 2004.
Making matters worse
Human activity has an impact on the environment too.
Where people have destroyed or damaged coral reefs and mangrove forests, they have removed a barrier that could have protected them from tsunamis.
The impact of a tsunami in the area is likely to be greater since it can sweep inland unhampered by these natural defenses.
Rebuilding
An area may not recover from a big tsunami for a very long time.
National and international efforts are often needed to address all the different areas of rebuilding, from cleaning up the environment to putting up new buildings, resettling communities, and providing emotional and psychological help for victims.
Back to normal
It’s very important for the people affected by a disaster to return to some kind of normal life as quickly as possible.
Providing schools and at least temporary homes is a priority once the immediate needs for food, water and medicine have been met.
In building houses, there can be a conflict between people’s desire to rebuild traditional homes and the advice of engineers and other experts on building to avoid future tsunami damage, either by building in a different place or using different methods.
It is a sensitive issue that needs careful handling.
 ▲ A man mends the roof of a building destroyed by the tsunami in 2004 in Nagapattinam, India.
Not just houses and businesses are destroyed by a tsunami.
Public facilities such as schools and hospitals must be rebuilt, roads and harbors must be repaired, and vital supplies such as water, electricity.
and communications networks must all be restored before normal life can resume.
A financial view
The financial cost of re-creating whole communities can be immense.
People must not only be provided with new homes; they must also be able to continue to support themselves.
A fishing community will always live near the coast.
A tourist area will always need buildings on the seafront.
People can only fully recover when their traditional industries have been restored.
 ▲ Two volunteers run a temporary school set up to help children in Sri Lanka after the 2004 tsunami destroyed their regular school.
CASE STUDY
Philippines (Moro Gulf), 1976
A tsunami and earthquake centered on the Cotabato Trench in the Celebes Sea killed more than 7,000 people in the Philippines on August 17, 1976.
Ninety percent of the deaths were caused by the tsunami, which swept away the whole of Pagadian City while the population slept.
Pagadian has been rebuilt and now has a population of 73,000.
Most of the houses along the coast in Pagadian are made of wood, often supported on stilts.
Those houses were quickly rebuilt, but are vulnerable to further tsunamis.
Keeping an Eye on Things
Because tsunamis are caused by other events, they can’t be predicted independently.
Early warning systems either spot events that may trigger a tsunami or identify a tsunami when it is on its way - by then, little time may be left for people to escape.
Tsunami warning
Local early warning systems detect signs of earthquakes and the earth’s plates shifting to predict a possible tsunami.
People are warned using sirens and public address systems.
There are many false alarms since it is not possible to tell whether a tsunami will actually occur.
Remote warning systems are more accurate and never give a false alarm.
They use wave gauges and seafloor pressure gauges to spot a sudden rise in sea level or rise in pressure on the seabed that means a tsunami has already started.
The tsunami can then be modeled by a computer and accurate predictions and warnings issued.
 ▲ Since the tsunami of 1998, people living near the coast of Papua New Guinea have been encouraged to adopt a tree to climb if another tsunami hits.
They can cut toeholds in the trunk and know they have somewhere safe to go if necessary.
Watching from space
The tsunami in the Indian Ocean in 2004 was the first to be spotted by a satellite.
Although the satellite registered a two-foot (0.6 meter) rise in sea level, this information was not useful for warning people.
It took five hours to process the information, and it was only by chance that the satellite was passing the area at the appropriate time.
More usefully, satellites monitor the movement of tectonic plates and any telltale bulging of volcanoes and so are able to give early warnings of eruptions or earthquakes that may trigger a tsunami.
Up against the wall
In some places, such as Japan and the Maldives, strong sea walls have been built in the hope of holding back a tsunami.
But some experts believe a strong tsunami may smash down the walls or simply sweep over the top.
The second possibility is more dangerous since people could then be crushed against the wall in the backwash.
 ▲ Testing a new system that uses text messages to warn people about a tsunami approaching the area.
AN EARLY WARNING SYSTEM FOR THE INDIAN OCEAN
After the disastrous Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004, work on an early warning system for the Indian Ocean has become a priority.
A system of seafloor pressure sensors will provide immediate warning of a tsunami.
When pressure on the seabed increases because of a tsunami above it, a message will be sent by sonar to a buoy above the sensor.
The buoy will then send a radio warning to a tsunami warning center by satellite, which will communicate with local coordinators by phone, radio, fax, and e-mail.
Where Next?
A tsunami can strike almost any area of coast.
Tsunamis often start in areas where earthquakes and volcanic eruptions are likely but can cross oceans to hit land.
Freak events can even trigger tsunamis in areas where we might least expect them.
Looking ahead
Scientists try to identify places that may be in danger of a large tsunami because earthquakes or volcanic eruptions are likely either in the local area or across the sea.
More quakes are likely in the Indian Ocean, for example, so Indonesia is still in danger.
Where volcanic eruptions have caused tsunamis in the past, they may do so again.
The Mediterranean could be in danger from an eruption of Mount Vesuvius in Italy or a Greek island volcano.
Japan is in danger of tsunamis both from local earthquakes and from quakes across the Pacific.
Hawaii is in danger of tsunamis from earthquakes on the fault lines running around the west coast of the United States and Canada.
From outer space
In the past, some mega-tsunamis have been caused by meteorites landing in the sea.
Geological evidence suggests that large tsunamis hitting the coast of Australia and New Zealand a few hundred years ago may have been caused by meteorites.
Scientists predict there is a one in 4,000 chance of a huge meteorite, known as 1950 DA, hitting the Earth on March 16, 2880.
It could cause a tsunami 396 feet (120 meters) high.
Asteroids the size of 1950 DA have probably struck the Earth about 600 times since the age of the dinosaurs - about once every 100,000 years.
 ▲ Were the dinosaurs wiped out by a meteorite?
A large meteorite hitting the sea would start a monster tsunami.
MEGA-TSUNAMIS
A mega-tsunami is a giant tsunami, larger than any that humans have ever recorded.
The last known mega-tsunami was four thousand years ago at Réunion Island in the Indian Ocean.
The largest recorded wave was in Alaska in 1958, caused by a landslide.
It was a quarter mile high.
Scientists think that when the volcano Cumbre Vieja in the Canary Islands erupts, a huge landslide may send half a billion tons of rock crashing into the Atlantic.
A gigantic wave would race across the ocean and sweep away everything within 12 miles (20 kilometers) of the coast in North America and the Caribbean.