In a university commencement address several years ago, Brian Dyson, CEO of Coca Cola Enterprises, spoke of the relation of work to one's other commitments:
Imagine life as a game in which you are juggling some five balls in the air.
You name them - work, family, health, friends and spirit - and you're keeping all of these in the air.
You will soon understand that work is a rubber ball.
If you drop it, it will bounce back.
But the other four balls - family, health, friends and spirit - are made of glass.
If you drop one of these, they will be irrevocably scuffed, marked, nicked, damaged or even shattered.
They will never be the same.
You must understand that and strive for balance in your life.
How?
Don't undermine your worth by comparing yourself with others.
It is because we are different and each of us is special.
Don't set your goals by what other people deem important.
Only you know what is best for you.
Don't take for granted the things closest to your heart.
Cling to them as they would be your life, for without them, life is meaningless.
Don't let your life slip through your fingers by living in the past or for the future.
By living your life one day at a time, you live ALL the days of your life.
Don't give up when you still have something to give.
Nothing is really over until the moment you stop trying.
Don't be afraid to admit that you are less than perfect.
It is this fragile thread that binds us to each together.
Don't be afraid to encounter risks.
It is by taking chances that we learn how to be brave.
Don't shut love out of your life by saying it's impossible to find.
The quickest way to receive love is to give it; the fastest way to lose love is to hold it too tightly; and the best way to keep love is to give it wings.
Don't run through life so fast that you forget not only where you've been, but also where you are going.
Don't forget, a person's greatest emotional need is to feel appreciated.
Don't be afraid to learn.
Knowledge is weightless, a treasure you can always carry easily.
Don't use time or words carelessly.
Neither can be retrieved.
Life is not a race, but a journey to be savored each step of the way.
Yesterday is history, tomorrow is a mystery and today is a gift : that's why we call it "The Present".
An elderly carpenter was ready to retire.
He told his employer of his plans to leave the house-building business and live a more leisurely life with his wife, enjoying his extended family.
He would miss the paycheck, but he needed to retire.
They could get by.
The employer was sorry to see his good worker go and asked if he could build just one more house as a personal favor.
The carpenter said yes, but in time it was easy to see that his heart was not in his work.
He resorted to shoddy workmanship and used inferior materials.
It was an unfortunate way to end his career.
When the carpenter finished his work and the employer came to inspect the house and handed the front-door key to the carpenter. "
This is your house," he said, "My gift to you. "
What a shock!
What a shame!
If he had only known he was building his own house, he would have done it all so differently.
Now he had to live in the home he had built none too well.
So it is with us.
We build our lives in a distracted way, reacting rather than acting, willing to put up less than the best.
At important points we do not give the job our best effort.
Then with a shock we look at the situation we have created and find that we are now living in the house we have built.
If we had realized, we would have done it differently.
Think of yourself as the carpenter.
Think about your house.
Each day you hammer a nail, place a board, or erect a wall.
Build wisely.
It is the only life you will ever build.
Even if you live it for only one day more, that day deserves to be lived graciously and with dignity.
The plaque on the wall says, "Life is a do-it-yourself project. "
Who could say it more clearly?
Your life tomorrow will be the result of your attitudes and the choices you make today.
A university professor went to visit a famous Zen master.
While the master quietly served tea, the professor talked about Zen.
The master poured the visitor's cup to the brim, and then kept pouring.
The professor watched the overflowing cup until he could no longer restrain himself. "
It's overfull!
No more will go in!"
The professor blurted. "
You are like this cup," the master replied, "How can I show you Zen unless you first empty your cup. "
Henry is the kind of guy you love to hate.
He is always in a good mood and always has something positive to say.
When someone would ask him how he was doing, he would reply, "If I were any better, I'd be twins!"
He was a natural motivator.
If an employee was having a bad day, Henry was there telling the employee how to look on the positive side of the situation.
Seeing this style really made me curious, so one day I went up to Henry and asked him, "I don't get it.
You can't be positive all the time.
How do you do it? "
Henry replied, "Each morning I wake up and say to myself, 'Henry, you have two choices today.
You can choose to be in a good mood or you can choose to be in a bad mood.'
I choose to be in a good mood.
Each time something bad happens, I can choose to be a victim or choose to learn from it.
I choose to learn from it.
Every time someone comes to me complaining, I can choose to accept their complaining or I can point out the positive side of life.
I choose the positive side of life. "
" Yeah, right.
It isn't that easy. "
I protested.
" Yes, it is," Henry said. "
Life is all about choices.
When you cut away all the junk, every situation is a choice.
You choose how you react to situations.
You choose how people will affect your mood.
You choose to be in a good mood or bad mood.
The bottom line is: It's your choice how you live life. "
I reflected on what Henry said.
Soon thereafter, I left the big enterprise that I had worked in for years to start my own business.
We lost touch, but I often thought about him when I made a choice about life instead of reacting to it.
Several years later, I heard Henry was involved in a serious accident, falling off 60 feet from a communications tower.
After 18 hours of surgery, and weeks of intensive care, Henry was released from the hospital with rods placed in his back.
I saw Henry about six months after the accident.
When I asked him how he was, he replied, "If I were any better, I'd be twins.
Wanna see my scars? "
I declined to see his wounds, but did ask him what had gone through his mind as the accident took place.
" The first thing that went through my mind was the well being of my soon-to-born daughter," Henry replied. "
Then, as I lay on the ground, remembered I had two choices: I could choose to live or I could choose to die.
I chose to live. " "
Weren't you scared?
Did you lose consciousness? "
I asked.
Henry continued, "… the paramedics were great.
They kept telling me I was going to be fine.
But when they wheeled me into the operation room and I saw the expressions on the faces of the doctors and nurses, I got really scared.
In their eyes, I read ' He'd a dead man.'
I knew I needed to take action. " "
What did you do? "
I asked. "
Well, there was a big burly nurse shouting questions at me."
said Henry. "
She asked me if I was allergic to anything. '
Yes,' I said.
The doctors and nurses stopped working as they waited for my reply.
I took a deep breath and yelled, 'Gravity.'
Over their laughter, I told them, 'I'm choosing to live.
Operate on me as if I am alive, not dead.' "
Henry lived, thanks to the skill of his doctors, but also because of his amazing attitude.
I learned from him that every day we have a choice to live fully.
Attitude is everything.
When I was in the 8th grade in California, a girl named Grace in my class had a terrible accident.
As she was running to the bus in order not to miss it, she slipped on some ice and fell under the rear wheels of the bus.
She survived the accident, but was paralyzed from the waist down.
I went to see her, in my 13-year-old mind thinking she wouldn't live normally from then on.
Over the years, I moved and didn't think much about Grace after that.
Three years ago, in Florida, my oldest son was hit by a car while riding his bike, causing a terrible brain injury.
While I was looking after my son, a lady who said she was the hospital's social worker called.
It was a particularly trying day.
I burst into tears for no reason and hung up.
A short time later, a beautiful woman, in a wheelchair, rolled into my son's room with a box of tissues.
After 16 years, I still recognized Grace.
She smiled, handed me the tissues and hugged me.
I told her who I was, and after we both got through the shock of that, she began to tell me about her life since we last saw each other.
She had married, had children and got her degree so that she could smooth the path for those less fortunate than her.
She told me that if there was anything she could give me, it would be hope.
Looking at this wonderful, giving person, I felt small.
But I also felt the first hope I had felt since learning that my son was hurt.
From this person that I thought would have no quality of life, I learned that where there is life, there is hope.
My son miraculously recovered and we moved back north, but I owe Grace a debt that I can never repay.
Shanbay_Extensive_Reading:
It is not difficult to imagine a world short of ambition.
It would probably be a kinder world: without demands, without abrasions, without disappointments.
People would have time for reflection.
Such work as they did would not be for themselves but for the collectivity.
Competition would never enter in.
Conflict would be eliminated, tension become a thing of the past.
The stress of creation would be at an end.
Art would no longer be troubling, but purely celebratory in its functions.
Longevity would be increased, for fewer people would die of heart attack or stroke caused by tumultuous endeavor.
Anxiety would be extinct.
Time would stretch on and on, with ambition long departed from the human heart.
Ah, how unrelievedly boring life would be!
There is a strong view that holds that success is a myth, and ambition therefore a sham.
Does this mean that success does not really exist?
That achievement is at bottom empty?
That the efforts of men and women are of no significance alongside the force of movements and events?
Now not all success, obviously, is worth esteeming, nor all ambition worth cultivating.
Which are and which are not is something one soon enough learns on one's own.
But even the most cynical secretly admit that success exists; that achievement counts for a great deal; and that the true myth is that the actions of men and women are useless.
To believe otherwise is to take on a point of view that is likely to be deranging.
It is, in its implications, to remove all motives for competence, interest in attainment, and regard for posterity.
We do not choose to be born.
We do not choose our parents.
We do not choose our historical epoch, the country of our birth, or the immediate circumstances of our upbringing.
We do not, most of us, choose to die, nor do we choose the time or conditions of our death.
But within all this realm of choicelessness, we do choose how we shall live: courageously or in cowardice, honorably or dishonorably, with purpose or in drift.
We decide what is important and what is trivial in life.
We decide that what makes us significant is either what we do or what we refuse to do.
But no matter how indifferent the universe may be to our choices and decisions, these choices and decisions are ours to make.
We decide.
We choose.
And as we decide and choose, so are our lives formed.
In the end, forming our own destiny is what ambition is about.
Everything happens for a reason.
Nothing happens by chance or by means of good or bad luck.
Illness, injury, love, lost moments of true greatness and sheer stupidity all occur to test the limits of your soul.
Without these small tests, if they be events, illnesses or relationships, life would be like a smoothly paved, straight, flat road to nowhere.
If someone hurts you, betrays you, or breaks your heart, forgive them.
For they have helped you learn about trust and the importance of being cautious to who you open your heart to.
If someone loves you, love them back unconditionally, not only because they love you, but because they are teaching you to love and opening your heart and eyes to things you would have never seen or felt without them.
Make every day count.
Appreciate every moment and take from it everything that you possibly can, for you may never be able to experience it again.
Talk to people who you have never talked to before, and actually listen.
Hold your head up because you have every right to.
Tell yourself you are a great individual and believe in yourself, for if you don't believe in yourself, no one else will believe in you either.
You can make of your life anything you wish.
Create your own life and then go out and live.
Three passions, simple but overwhelmingly strong, have governed my life: the longing for love, the search for knowledge, and unbearable pity for the suffering of mankind.
These passions, like great winds, have blown me hither and thither, in a wayward course, over a deep ocean of anguish, reaching to the very verge of despair.
I have sought love, first, because it brings ecstasy - so great that I would often have sacrificed all the rest of life for a few hours of this joy.
I have sought it, next, because it relieves loneliness - that terrible loneliness in which one shivering consciousness looks over the rim of the world into the cold unfathomable lifeless abyss.
I have sought it, finally, because in the union of love I have seen, in a mystic miniature, the prefiguring vision of the heaven that saints and poets have imagined.
This is what I sought, and though it might seem too good for human life, this is what - at last - I have found.
With equal passion I have sought knowledge.
I have wished to understand the hearts of men.
I have tried to apprehend the Pythagorean power by which number holds sway above the flu.
A little of this, but not much, I have achieved.
Love and knowledge, so far as they were possible, led upward toward the heavens.
But always pity brought me back to earth.
Echoes of cries of pain reverberate in my heart.
Children in famine, victims tortured by oppressors, helpless old people - a hated burden to their sons, and the whole world of loneliness, poverty and pain make a mockery of what human life should be.
I long to alleviate the evil, but I cannot, and I too suffer.
This has been my life.
I have found it worth living, and would gladly live it again if the chance were offered me.
There once was a king who offered a prize to the artist who would paint the best picture of peace.
Many artists tried.
The king looked at all the pictures.
But there were only two he really liked, and he had to choose between them.
One picture was of a calm lake.
The lake was a perfect mirror for peaceful towering mountains all around it.
Overhead was a blue sky with fluffy white clouds.
All who saw this picture thought that it was a perfect of peace.
The other picture had mountains, too.
But these were rugged and bare.
Above was an angry sky, from which rain fell and in which lightning played.
Down the side of the mountain tumbled a foaming waterfall.
This did not look peaceful at all.
But when the king looked closely, he saw behind the waterfall a tiny bush growing in a crack in the rock.
In the bush a mother bird had built her nest.
There, in the midst of the rush of angry water, sat the mother bird on her nest - in perfect peace.
The king chose the second picture.
" Because," explained the king, "peace does not mean to be in a place where there is no noise, trouble, or hard work.
Peace means to be in the midst of all those things and still be calm in your heart.
That is the real meaning of peace. "
However mean your life is, meet it and live it; do not shirk it and call it hard names.
It is not so bad as you are.
It looks poorest when you are richest.
The fault-finder will find faults even in paradise.
Love your life, poor as it is.
You may perhaps have some pleasant, thrilling, glorious hours, even in a poorhouse.
The setting sun is reflected from the windows of the almshouse as brightly as from the rich man's abode; the snow melts before its door as early in the spring.
I do not see but a quiet mind may live as contentedly there, and have as cheering thoughts, as in a palace.
The town's poor seem to me often to live the most independent lives of any.
Maybe they are simply great enough to receive without misgiving.
Most think that they are above being supported by the town; but it oftener happens that they are not above supporting themselves by dishonest means, which should be more disreputable.
Cultivate poverty like a garden herb, like sage.
Do not trouble yourself much to get new things, whether clothes or friends.
Turn the old; return to them.
Things do not change; we change.
Sell your clothes and keep your thoughts.
God will see that you do not want society.
If I were confined to a corner of garret all my days, like a spider, the world would be just as large to me while I had my thoughts about me.
The philosopher said, "From an army of three divisions one can take away its general, and put it in disorder; from the man the most abject and vulgar one cannot take away his thought. "
Do not seek so anxiously to be developed, to subject yourself to many influences to be played on; it is all dissipation.
Humility like darkness reveals the heavenly lights.
The shadows of poverty and meanness gather around us, "and lo!
Creation widens to our view. "
We are often reminded that if there were bestowed on us the wealth of Croesus, our aims must still be the same, and our means essentially the same.
Moreover, if you are restricted in your range by poverty, if you cannot buy books and newspapers, for instance, you are but confined to the most significant and vital experiences; you are compelled to deal with the material which yields the most sugar and the most starch.
It is life near the bone where it is sweetest.
You are defended from being a trifler.
No man loses ever on a lower level by magnanimity on a higher.
Superfluous wealth can buy superfluities only.
Money is not required to buy one necessary of the soul.
I live in the angle of a leaden wall, into whose composition was poured a little alloy of bell-metal.
Often, in the repose of my mid-day, there reaches my ears a confused tintinnabulum from without.
It is the noise of my contemporaries.
My neighbors tell me of their adventures with famous gentlemen and ladies, what notabilities they met at the dinner-table; but I am no more interested in such things than in the contents of the Daily Times.
The interest and the conversation are about costume and manners chiefly; but a goose is a goose still, dress it as you will.
They tell me of California and Texas, of England and the Indies, of the Hon.
Mr. - of Georgia or of Massachusetts, all transient and fleeting phenomena, till I am ready to leap from their courtyard like the Mameluke bey.
I delight to come to my bearings - not walk in procession with pomp and parade, in a conspicuous place, but to walk even with the Builder of the universe, if I may - not to live in this restless, nervous, bustling, trivial Nineteenth Century, but stand or sit thoughtfully while it goes by.
What are men celebrating?
They are all on a committee of arrangements, and hourly expect a speech from somebody.
God is only the president of the day, and Webster is his orator.
I love to weigh, to settle, to gravitate toward that which most strongly and rightfully attracts me - not hang by the beam of the scale and try to weigh less - not suppose a case, but take the case that is; to travel the only path I can, and that on which no power can resist me.
It affords me no satisfaction to commence to spring an arch before I have got a solid foundation.
There is a solid bottom everywhere.
We read that the traveler asked the boy if the swamp before him had a hard bottom.
The boy replied that it had.
But presently the traveler's horse sank in up to the girths, and he observed to the boy, "I thought you said that this bog had a hard bottom". "
So it has," answered the latter, "but you have not got half way to it yet. "
So it is with the bogs and quicksands of society; but he is an old boy that knows it.
Only what is thought, said, or done at a certain rare coincidence is good.
I would not be one of those who will foolishly drive a nail into mere lath and plastering; such a deed would keep me awake nights.
Give me a hammer, and let me feel for the furring.
Do not depend on the putty.
Drive a nail home and clinch it so faithfully that you can wake up in the night and think of your work with satisfactory - a work at which you would not be ashamed to invoke the Muse.
So will help you God, and so only.
Every nail driven should be as another rivet in the machine of the universe, you carrying on the work.
Rather than love, than money, than fame, give me truth.
I sat at a table where were rich food and wine in abundance, and obsequious attendance, but sincerity and truth were not; and I went away hungry from the inhospitable board.
The hospitality was as cold as the ices.
I thought that there was no need of ice to freeze them.
They talked to me of the age of the wine and the fame of the vintage; but I thought of an older, a newer, and purer wine, of a more glorious vintage, which they had not got, and could not buy.
The style, the house and grounds and "entertainment" pass for nothing with me.
I called on the king, but he made me wait in his hall, and conducted like a man incapacitated for hospitality.
There was a man in my neighborhood who lived in a hollow tree.
His manners were truly regal.
I should have done better had I called on him.
Catch the star that holds your destiny, the one that forever twinkles within your heart.
Take advantage of precious opportunities while they still sparkle before you.
Always believe that your ultimate goal is attainable as long as you commit yourself to it.
Though barriers may sometimes stand in the way of your dreams, remember that your destiny is hiding behind them.
Accept the fact that not everyone is going to approve of the choices you've made, have faith in your judgment, catch the star that twinkles in your heart, and it will lead you to your destiny's path.
Follow that pathway and uncover the sweet sunrises that await you.
Take pride in your accomplishments, as they are stepping stones to your dreams.
Understand that you may make mistakes, but don't let them discourage you.
Value your capabilities and talents for they are what make you truly unique.
The greatest gifts in life are not purchased, but acquired through hard work and determination.
Finding the star that twinkles in your heart for you alone are capable of making your brightest dreams come true.
In over a dozen years as a stress consultant, the most pervasive and destructive mental tendencies I've seen is that of focusing on what we want instead of what we have.
It doesn't seem to make any difference how much we have; we just keep expanding our list of desires, which guarantees we will remain dissatisfied.
The mind-set that says "I'll be happy when this desire is fulfilled" is the same mind-set that will repeat itself once that desire is met.
A friend of ours closed escrow on his new home on a Sunday.
The very next time we saw him he was talking about his next house that was going to be even bigger.
He isn't alone.
Most of us do the very same thing.
We want this or that.
If we don't get what we want, we keep thinking about all that we don't have - and we remain dissatisfied.
If we do get what we want, we simply recreate the same thinking in our new circumstances.
So, despite getting what we want, we still remain unhappy.
Happiness can't be found when we are yearning for new desires.
Luckily, there is a way to be happy.
It involves changing the emphasis of our thinking from what we want to what we have.
Rather than wishing your spouse was different, try thinking about her wonderful qualities.
Instead of complaining about your salary, be grateful that you have a job.
Rather than wishing you were able to take a vacation to Hawaii, think of how much fun you have had close to home.
The list of possibilities is endless.
Each time you notice yourself falling into the "I wish life were different" trap, back off and start over.
Take a breath and remember all that you have.
When you focus not on what you want, but on what you have, you end up getting more of what you want anyway.
If you focus on the good qualities of your spouse, she'll be more loving.
If you are grateful for your job rather than complaining about it, you'll do a better job, be more productive, and probably end up getting a raise any way.
If you focus on ways to enjoy yourself around home rather than waiting to enjoy yourself in Hawaii, you'll end up having more fun.
If you ever do get to Hawaii, you'll be in the habit of enjoying yourself.
And, if by some chance you don't, you'll have a great life anyway.
Make a note to yourself to start thinking more about what you have than what you want.
If you do, your life will start appearing much better than before.
For perhaps the first time in your life, you'll know what it means to feel satisfied.
If the past has taught us anything, it is that every cause brings effect - every action has a consequence.
This thought, in my opinion, is the moral foundation of the universe; it applies equally in this world and the next.
We Chinese have a saying: "If a man plants melons, he will reap melons; if he sows beans, he will reap beans. "
And this is true of every man's life: good begets good, and evil leads to evil.
True enough, the sun shines on the saint and sinner alike, and too often it seems that the wicked wax and prosper.
But we can say with certitude that, with the individual as with the nation, the flourishing of the wicked is an illusion, for, unceasingly, life keeps books on us all.
In the end, we are all the sum total of our actions.
Character cannot be counterfeited, nor can it be put on and cast off as if it were a garment to meet the whim of the moment.
Like the markings on wood which are ingrained in the very heart of the tree, character requires time and nurture for growth and development.
Thus also day by day, we write our own destiny, for inexorably we become what we do.
This, I believe, is the supreme logic and law of life.
I think that, from a biological standpoint, human life almost reads like a poem.
It has its own rhythm and beat, its internal cycles of growth and decay.
It begins with innocent childhood, followed by awkward adolescence trying awkwardly to adapt itself to mature society, with its young passions and follies, its ideals and ambitions;
then it reaches a manhood of intense activities, profiting from experience and learning more about society and human nature; at middle age, there is a slight easing of tension, a mellowing of character like the ripening of fruit or the mellowing of good wine, and the gradual acquiring of a more tolerant, more cynical and at the same time a kindlier view of life; 
then in the sunset of our life, the endocrine glands decrease their activity, and if we have a true philosophy of old age and have ordered our life pattern according to it, it is for us the age of peace and security and leisure and contentment; finally, life flickers out and one goes into eternal sleep, never to wake up again.
One should be able to sense the beauty of this rhythm of life, to appreciate, as we do in grand symphonies, its main theme, its strains of conflict and the final resolution.
The movements of these cycles are very much the same in a normal life, but the music must be provided by the individual himself.
In some souls, the discordant note becomes harsher and harsher and finally overwhelms or submerges the main melody.
Sometimes the discordant note gains so much power that the music can no longer go on, and the individual shoots himself with a pistol or jump into a river.
But that is because his original leitmotif has been hopelessly over-shadowed through the lack of a good self-education.
Otherwise the normal human life runs to its normal end in a kind of dignified movement and procession.
There are sometimes in many of us too many staccatos or impetuosos, and because the tempo is wrong, the music is not pleasing to the ear; we might have more of the grand rhythm and majestic tempo of the Ganges, flowing slowly and eternally into the sea.
No one can say that a life with childhood, manhood and old age is not a beautiful arrangement; the day has its morning, noon and sunset, and the year has its seasons, and it is good that it is so.
There is no good or bad in life, except what is good according to its own season.
And if we take this biological view of life and try to live according to the seasons, no one but a conceited fool or an impossible idealist can deny that human life can be lived like a poem.
Shakespeare has expressed this idea more graphically in his passage about the seven stages of life, and a good many Chinese writers have said about the same thing.
It is curious that Shakespeare was never very religious, or very much concerned with religion.
I think this was his greatness; he took human life largely as it was, and intruded himself as little upon the general scheme of things as he did upon the characters of his plays.
Shakespeare was like Nature itself, and that is the greatest compliment we can pay to a writer or thinker.
He merely lived, observed life and went away.
I used to watch her from my kitchen window; she seemed so small as she muscled her way through the crowd of boys on the playground.
The school was across the street from our home and I would often watch the kids as they played during recess.
A sea of children, and yet to me, she stood out from them all.
I remember the first day I saw her playing basketball.
I watched in wonder as she ran circles around the other kids.
She managed to shoot jump shots just over their heads and into the net.
The boys always tried to stop her but no one could.
I began to notice her at other times, basketball in hand, playing alone.
She would practice dribbing and shooting over and over again, sometimes until dark.
One day I asked her why she practiced so much.
She looked directly in my eyes and without a moment of hesitation she said, "I want to go to college.
The only way I can go is if I get a scholarship.
I like basketball.
I decided that if I were good enough, I would get a scholarship.
I am going to play college basketball.
I want to be the best.
My daddy told me if the dream is big enough, the facts don't count. "
Then she smiled and ran towards the court to recap the routine I had seen over and over again.
Well, I had to give it to her - she was determined.
I watched her through those junior high years and into high school.
Every week, she led her varsity team to victory.
One day in her senior year, I saw her sitting in the grass, head cradled in her arms.
I walked across the street and sat down in the cool grass beside her.
Quietly I asked what was wrong. "
Oh, nothing," came a soft reply, "I am just too short. "
The coach told her that at 5.5, she would probably never get to play for a top ranked team much less offered a scholarship - so she should stop dreaming about college.
She was heartbroken and I felt my own throat tighten as I sensed her disappointment.
I asked her if she had talked to her dad about it yet.
She lifted her head from her hands and told me that her father said those coaches were wrong.
They just did not understand the power of a dream.
He told her that if she really wanted to play for a good college, if she truly wanted a scholarship, that nothing could stop her except one thing - her own attitude.
He told her again, "If the dream is big enough, the facts don't count. "
The next year, as she and her team went to the Northern California Championship game, she was seen by a college recruiter.
She was indeed offered a scholarship, a full ride, to a Division I, NCAA women's basketball team.
She was going to get the college education that she had dreamed of and worked toward for all those years.
It's true: If the dream is big enough, the facts don't count.
She was fond of Strauss, KFC, and Brazil Espresso.
Dressed in decent grey skirt suit, she was busy working in a modernized office.
That was her life before meeting me.
Ever since our dating all those have vanished.
It was in 1997 when I started my so-called "great business".
She followed me wholeheartedly.
That summer came early.
Flowers dyed the town dazzlingly red.
We stayed in the outskirts, in a small room of a condo known as an illegal structure of this city.
Wind blew through all the four walls into the room, then home of her and me.
In order to save money, we walked to our store downtown every day.
Lunches were always simple like doggie food, worth no more than 1.5 yuan for each of us.
We walked back home at the end of the day, so beat that all we wanted was collapse into bed.
It seemed that we make it through one whole year this way.
Those days were bitter.
Business was my totem; love was her belief.
Both supported us from falling apart.
We walked home late one day.
She sat at the bed edge, washing her feet in a bucket on the floor.
I went to the landlord for boiled water to make instant noodle.
When I got back carrying a thermos bottle, she fell back into the bed sound asleep, feet in water.
She must have been extremely exhausted.
One of her hands was under her body.
I heard her light snore.
I tiptoed to the bed and tried to flip her over so that she would be in a more comfortable position.
I stared at her face, which was a young and pretty one and yet so wearied and exhausted.
I saw one mosquito on this pretty face.
That summer my city was like a huge steamer box.
We put off one day to another the plan to buy a mosquito net, just to save money.
I knew mosquitoes were flying all about in our room, but I seemed not to be bothered.
So exhausted when I got back each day, I doubted if I would wake up even though someone cut a piece of flesh off my body, let alone mosquito bites.
That mosquito stayed at her forehead, sipping her blood greedily.
She was still sound asleep, not feeling anything.
Perhaps she was in a sweet dream in which our business was turning better.
There came an abrupt throb of my heart.
I reached to wave my hand at the mosquito.
But it was not at all scared.
I wanted to bat it to death.
I raised my hand up high, but it could not descend.
I was afraid of waking her up - she was really worn out.
There lay a weak mosquito between her and me, doing harm to her right now.
I froze there, hand in the air.
I did not know what to do.
I was worried.
Suddenly, I began to get deeply fed up with myself.
I hated me.
On the night of that summer, I stood by her side, feeling extremely guilty of her, of our love.
The mosquito finally flew away.
I forgave it, but I could never forgive myself.
In the daytime I went by a peddler's stall and saw a pink mosquito net priced 16 yuan.
That amount could be spent on a lot of dealings at the time.
I headed back home without buying it.
After she fell asleep, I got out of bed, stood by her side, and waved away mosquitoes with a hard paper board as a weapon.
I was her temporary mosquito net all that night through.
After a while she woke up to find what I was doing.
She gazed at me, and ten minutes later tears flooded her face.
The next day saw a pink mosquito net in my room.
We were both silent working together to fix it on our bed.
In my mind I had presented the net as a gift to her.
I did not tell her that it was a gift.
I was feeling that it was like a rose in full bloom.
It was my compensation to love.
Then I realized that nothing could really make it up.
It was her birthday that day.
Years went by.
I earned 160,000 yuan, or precisely we earned 160,000 yuan.
We did a lot of shopping, but never a mosquito net any more.
We did not need any mosquito net, living in a very well decorated apartment, where no mosquitoes could fly inside.
Nevertheless, I always feel that all my money, and all my belongings are far less important than the 16-yuan mosquito net, which was invaluable to her, to our love.
That summer was past.
We had no choice but to love each other.
We are not born with courage, but neither are we born with fear.
Maybe some of our fears are brought on by your own experiences, by what someone has told you, by what you've read in the papers.
Some fears are valid, like walking alone in a bad part of town at two o'clock in the morning.
But once you learn to avoid that situation, you won't need to live in fear of it.
Fears, even the most basic ones, can totally destroy our ambitions.
Fear can destroy fortunes.
Fear can destroy relationships.
Fear, if left unchecked, can destroy our lives.
Fear is one of the many enemies lurking inside us.
Let me tell you about five of the other enemies we face from within.
The first enemy that you've got to destroy before it destroys you is indifference.
What a tragic disease this is! "
Ho-hum, let it slide.
I'll just drift along. "
Here's one problem with drifting: you can't drift your way to the top of the mountain.
The second enemy we face is indecision.
Indecision is the thief of opportunity and enterprise.
It will steal your chances for a better future.
Take a sword to this enemy.
The third enemy inside is doubt.
Sure, there's room for healthy skepticism.
You can't believe everything.
But you also can't let doubt take over.
Many people doubt the past, doubt the future, doubt each other, doubt the government, doubt the possibilities and doubt the opportunities.
Worst of all, they doubt themselves.
I'm telling you, doubt will destroy your life and your chances of success.
It will empty both your bank account and your heart.
Doubt is an enemy.
Go after it.
Get rid of it.
The fourth enemy within is worry.
We've all got to worry some.
Just don't let it conquer you.
Instead, let it alarm you.
Worry can be useful.
If you step off the curb in New York City and a taxi is coming, you've got to worry.
But you can't let worry loose like a mad dog that drives you into a small corner.
Here's what you've got to do with your worries: drive them into a small corner.
Whatever is out to get you, you've got to get it.
Whatever is pushing on you, you've got to push back.
The fifth interior enemy is overcaution.
It is the timid approach to life.
Timidity is not a virtue; it's an illness.
If you let it go, it'll conquer you.
Timid people don't get promoted.
They don't advance and grow and become powerful in the marketplace.
You've got to avoid overcaution.
Do battle with the enemies.
Do battle with your fears.
Build your courage to fight what's holding you back, what's keeping you from your goals and dreams.
Be courageous in your life and in your pursuit of the things you want and the person you want to become.
Rick and I hardly noticed when the waitress came and placed the plates on our table.
Our exchange was lively, if not profound.
We laughed about the movie that we had seen the night before and disagreed about the meaning behind the text we had just finished for our literature seminar.
As our sweet conversation continued, my eyes glanced across the restaurant, stopping at the small corner booth where an elderly couple sat.
Her floral-print dress seemed as faded as the cushion on which she had rested her worn handbag.
The top of his head was as shiny as the soft-boiled egg on which he very slowly nibbled.
She also ate her oatmeal at a slow, almost tedious pace.
But what drew my thoughts to them was their undisturbed silence.
It seemed to me that a melancholy emptiness permeated their little corner.
As the exchange between Rick and me fluctuated from laughs to whispers, confessions to assessments, this couple's poignant stillness called to me.
How sad, I thought, not to have anything left to say.
Wasn't there any page that they hadn't yet turned in each other's stories?
Rick and I paid our small tab and got up to leave the restaurant.
As we walked by the corner where the old couple sat, I accidentally dropped my wallet.
Bending over to pick it up, I noticed that under the table, each of their free hands was gently cradled in the other's.
They had been holding hands all this time!
I stood up and felt humbled by the simple yet profound act of connection I had just been privileged to witness.
This man's gentle caress of his wife's tired fingers filled not only what I had previously perceived as an emotionally empty corner, but also my heart.
Theirs was not the uncomfortable silence whose threat one always feels just behind the punch line or at the end of an anecdote on the first date.
No, theirs was a comfortable, relaxed ease, a gentle love that did not always need words to express itself.
They had probably shared this hour of the morning with each other for a long time, and maybe today wasn't that different from yesterday, but they were at peace with that, and with each other.
It is cold, so bitter cold on this dark winter day in 1942.
But it is no different from any other day in this Nazi concentration camp.
I am almost dead, surviving from day to day, from hour to hour, ever since I was taken from my home and brought here with tens of thousands of other Jews.
Will I still be alive tomorrow?
Will I be taken to the gas chamber tonight?
Back and forth next to the barbed wire fence trying to keep my emaciated body warm.
I am hungry, I have been hungry for long.
Each day, as more of us disappear, the happy past seems like a mere dream, and I sink deeper and deeper into despair.
Suddenly, I notice a young girl walking past on the other side of the barbed wire.
She stops and looks at me with sad eyes that seem to say that she understands, that she too cannot fathom why I am here.
I want to look away, oddly ashamed for this stranger to see me like this, but I cannot tear my eyes from hers.
Then she reaches into her pocket, and pulls out a red apple.
Oh, how long has it been since I have seen one!
She looks cautiously to the left and to the right and then with smile of triumph quickly throws the apple over the fence.
I run to pick it up, holding it in my trembling frozen fingers.
In my world of death this apple is an expression of life, of love.
I glance up in time to see the girl disappearing into the distance.
The next day I cannot help myself - I am drawn at the same time to that spot near the fence.
And again she comes.
And again she brings me an apple flinging it over the fence with that same sweet smile.
This time I catch it and hold it up for her to see.
Her eyes twinkle.
For seven months we meet like this.
One day I hear frightening news: we're being shipped to another camp.
The next day when I greet her my heart is breaking and I can barely speak as I say what must be said : "Don't bring me an apple tomorrow. "
I tell her, "I am being sent to another camp. "
Turning before I lose all my control I run away from the fence.
I cannot bear to look back.
Months pass and the nightmare continues.
But the memory of this girl sustains me through the terror, the pain, the hopelessness.
And then one day the nightmare is over.
The war has ended.
Those of us who are still alive are freed.
I have lost everything that was precious to me including my family.
But I still have the memory of this girl, a memory I carry in my heart and gives me the will to go on as I move to America to start a new life.
Years pass.
It is 1957.
I am living in New York City.
A friend convinces me to go on a blind date with a lady of his.
Reluctantly, I agree.
But she is nice, this woman named Roma, and like me she is an immigrant so we have at least that in common.
" Where were you during the war? "
Roma asks me gently in that delicate way immigrants ask one another questions about those years.
" I was in a concentration camp in Germany," I reply.
Roma gets a faraway look in her eyes, as if she is remembering something painful yet sweet.
" What is it? "
I ask.
" I am just thinking about something from my past, Herman," Roma explains in a voice suddenly very soft, "you see, when I was a young girl I lived near a concentration camp.
Where was a boy there, a prisoner and for a long while I used to visit him every day.
I remember I used to bring him apples.
I would throw the apple over the fence and he would be so happy. "
Roma sighs heavily and continues, "It is hard to describe how we felt about each other - after all we were young and we only exchanged a few words when we could - but I can tell you there was much love there.
I assume he was killed like so many others.
But I cannot bear to think that, and so I try to remember him as he was for those months we were given together. "
With my heart pounding so loudly, I look directly at Roma and ask, "And did that boy say to you one day 'Do not bring me an apple tomorrow.
I am being sent to another camp'? "
" Why, yes. "
Roma responds, her voice trembling.
" But Herman, how on earth could you possibly know that? "
I take her hands in mine and answer, "Because I was that young boy, Roma. "
For many moments, there is only silence.
We cannot take our eyes from each other, and as the veils of time lift, we recognize the soul behind the eyes, the dear friend we once loved so much, whom we have never stopped loving, whom we have never stopped remembering.
Finally, I speak, "Look Roma, I was separated from you once, And I don't ever want to be separated from you again.
Now I am free, and I want to be together with you forever.
Dear, will you marry me? "
I see the same twinkle in her eyes that I used to see as Roma says, "Yes, I will marry you. "
Almost forty years have passed since that day when I found my Roma again.
Destiny brought us together the first time during the war to show me a promise of hope, and now it had reunited us to fulfill that promise.
Valentine's Day, 1996.
I bring Roma to the Oprah Winfrey Show to honor her on national television.
I want to tell her in front of the millions of the people what I feel in my heart every day:
" Darling, you fed me in the concentration camp when I was hungry.
And I am still hungry, for something I will never get enough of: I am only hungry for your love. "
I have a friend who is falling in love.
She honestly claims the sky is bluer.
Mozart moves her to tears.
She has lost 15 pounds and looks like a cover girl.
" I'm young again! "
she shouts exuberantly.
As my friend raves on about her new love, I've taken a good look at my old one.
My husband of almost 20 years, Walter, has gained 15 pounds.
Once a marathon runner, he now runs only down hospital halls.
His hairline is receding and his body shows the signs of long working hours and too many candy bars.
Yet he can still give me a certain look across a restaurant table and I want to ask for the check and head home.
When my friend asked me "What will make this love last?",
I ran through all the obvious reasons: commitment, shared interests, unselfishness, physical attraction, communication.
Yet there's more.
We still have fun.
Spontaneous good times.
Yesterday, after slipping the rubber band off the rolled up newspaper, Walter flipped it playfully at me: this led to an all-out war.
Last Saturday at the grocery, we split the list and raced each other to see who could make it to the checkout first.
Even washing dishes can be a blast.
We enjoy simply being together.
And there are surprises.
One time I came home to find a note on the front door that led me to another note, then another, until I reached the walk-in closet.
I opened the door to find Walter holding a "pot of gold" (my cooking kettle) and the "treasure" of a gift package.
Sometimes I leave him notes on the mirror and little presents under his pillow.
There is understanding.
I understand why he must play basketball with the guys.
And he understands why, once a year, I must get away from the house , the kids - and even him - to meet my sisters for a few days of nonstop talking and laughing.
There is sharing.
Not only do we share household worries and parental burdens - we also share ideas.
Walter came home from a convention last month and presented me with a thick historical novel.
Though he prefers thrillers and science fiction, he had read the novel on the plane.
He touched my heart when he explained it was because he wanted to be able to exchange ideas about the book after I'd read it.
There is forgiveness.
When I'm embarrassingly loud and crazy at parties, Walter forgives me.
When he confessed losing some of our savings in the stock market, I gave him a hug and said, "It's okay.
It's only money. "
There is sensitivity.
Last week he walked through the door with that look that tells me it's been a tough day.
After he spent some time with the kids, I asked him what happened.
He told me about a 60-year-old woman who'd had a stroke.
He wept as he recalled the woman's husband standing beside her bed, caressing her hand.
How was he going to tell this husband of 40 years that his wife would probably never recover?
I shed a few tears myself.
Because of the medical crisis.
Because there were still people who have been married 40 years.
Because my husband is still moved and concerned after years of hospital rooms and dying patients.
There is faith.
Last Tuesday a friend came over and confessed her fear that her husband is losing his courageous battle with cancer.
On Wednesday I went to lunch with a friend who is struggling to reshape her life after divorce.
On Thursday a neighbor called to talk about the frightening effects of Alzheimer's disease on her father-in-law's personality.
On Friday a childhood friend called long-distance to tell me her father had died.
I hung up the phone and thought: this is too much heartache for one week.
Through my tears, as I went out to run some errands, I noticed the boisterous orange blossoms of the gladiolus outside my window.
I heard the delighted laughter of my son and his friend as they played.
I caught sight of a wedding party emerging from a neighbor's house.
The bride, dressed in satin and lace, tossed her bouquet to her cheering friends.
That night, I told my husband about these events.
We helped each other acknowledge the cycles of life and that the joys counter the sorrows.
It was enough to keep us going.
Finally, there is knowing.
I know Walter will throw his laundry just shy of the hamper every night; he'll be late to most appointments and eat the last chocolate in the box.
He knows that I sleep with a pillow over my head; I'll lock us out of the house at a regular basis, and I will also eat the last chocolate.
I guess our love last because it is comfortable.
No, the sky is not bluer: It's just a familiar hue.
We don't feel particularly young: we've experienced too much that has contributed to our growth and wisdom, taking its toll on our bodies, and created our memories.
I hope we've got what it takes to make our love last.
As a bride, I had Walter's wedding band engraved with Robert Browning's line "Grow old along with me! "
We're following those instructions.
When I was younger, I thought that to love one's self was vanity and not a virtuous trait.
As I have grown older, that belief has passed away, as have so many others.
There is a vast deviation between being vain and loving one's self.
We are all in this world together striving for more or less the same things.
To contribute and have our lives count for something.
To love and be loved.
To laugh and… yes, to cry.
We seek shelter, nourishment, a mate, warmth, clothing, family, friends; we seek approval, love and self-esteem.
We are all imperfect.
Often during our search we forget to simply enjoy what life is.
We become so caught up in what could have been, what should be, what might be, that many of our todays are lost.
Let yesterday rest, live for today, hope and dream for your tomorrows.
If there is some part of you that lessens your self-image, some part of you that prevents you from loving yourself, change it, for only you can.
Life is filled with things we have no control over, but ourselves, we can control.
You are the clay, you are the sculptor and you have the ability to create a masterpiece.
The shape and form are there.
You have only to refine the work.
Is the task an easy one?
No.
There will be sips and flaws and you will be required to work and rework just as a sculptor must rework the clay before the piece is completed.
Should the sculptor throw out the piece condemning it as worthless because of a blemish or nick?
Of course not, where then would all the world's treasured art be?
I doubt we would have any.
How many masterpieces do you think have been created in one fell-swoop, a first effort completely successful without error, without change?
Is it possible that we fail to see that mankind is the most marvelous of all works of art?
A living, continuous, developing work of art.
How often have you heard the question "what is the human race coming to"?
The answer, in my mind at least, is whatever we make it, for we are the weavers of tomorrow.
You are a treasure, beyond price, one of a kind, irreplaceable.
Not perfect but well on your way to being a masterpiece.
Do not let your yesterdays hinder tomorrow's achievements.
Again, I say to you that these words are merely feelings and thoughts, one person's outlook is subject to change with tomorrow's setting sun, as I too continue to sculpt the lump of clay given to me at birth, called self.
A little boy asked his mother, "Why are you crying? "
" Because I'm a woman," she told him.
" I don't understand," he said.
His mum just hugged him and said, "And you never will. "
Later the little boy asked his father, "Why does mother seem to cry for no reason? "
" All women cry for no reason," was all his dad could say.
The little boy grew up and became a man, still wondering why women cry.
Finally he put in a call to God; and when God got on the phone, he asked, "God, why do women cry so easily? "
God said, "When I made the woman she had to be special.
I made her shoulders strong enough to carry the weight of the world; yet, gentle enough to give comfort.
" I gave her an inner strength to endure childbirth and the rejection that many times comes from her children.
" I gave her a hardness that allows her to keep going when everyone else gives up, and take care of her family through sickness and fatigue without complaining.
" I gave her the sensitivity to love her children under any and all circumstances, even when her child has hurt her very badly.
" And finally, I gave her a tear to shed.
This is hers exclusively to use whenever it is needed.
" You see: the beauty of a woman is not in the clothes she wears, the figure that she carries, or the way she combs her hair.
The beauty of a woman must be seen in her eyes, because that is the doorway to her heart and the place where love resides. "
Every woman is beautiful.
" But what if I break my arm again? "
my five-year-old daughter asked, her lower lip trembling.
I knelt holding onto her bike and looked at her right in the eyes.
I knew how much she wanted to learn to ride, how often she felt left out when her friends pedaled by our house.
Yet ever since she'd fallen off her bike and broken her arm, she'd been afraid.
" Oh, honey ," I said, "I don't think you'll break another arm. "
" But I could, couldn't I? "
" Yes," I admitted and found myself struggling for the right thing to say.
At times like this, I wished I had a partner to turn to.
Someone who might help find the right words to make my little girl's problems disappear.
But after a disastrous marriage and a painful divorce, I'd welcomed the hardships of being a single parent and had been adamant in telling anyone who tried to fix me up that I was terminally single.
" I don't think I want to ride," she said and got off her bike.
We walked away and sat down beside a tree.
" Don't you want to ride with your friends? "
I asked.
" And I thought you were hoping to start riding your bike to school next year," I added.
" I was," she said, her voice almost a quiver.
" You know, honey," I said, "Almost everything you do comes with risks.
You could get a broken arm in a car wreck and then be afraid to ever ride in a car again.
You could break your arm jumping rope.
You could break your arm at gymnastics.
Do you want to stop going to gymnastics? "
" No," she said.
And with a determined spirit, she stood up and agreed to try again.
I held on to the back of her bike until she found the courage to say, "Let's go! "
I spent the rest of the afternoon at the park watching a very brave little girl overcome the fear and congratulating myself for being a self-sufficient single parent.
As we walked home, pushing the bike as we made our way along the sidewalk, she asked me about a conversation she'd overheard me having with my mother the night before.
" Why were you and grandma arguing last night? "
My mother was one of the many people who constantly tried to fix me up.
How many times had I told her "no" to meet the Mr. Perfect she picked out for me.
She just knew Steve was the man for me.
" It's nothing," I told her.
She shrugged, "Grandma said she just wanted you to find someone to love. "
" What grandma wants is for some guy to break my heart again," I snapped, angry that my mother had said anything about this to my daughter.
" But Mom…"
" You're too young to understand," I told her.
She was quiet for the next few minutes.
Then she looked up and in a small voice gave me something to think about.
" So I guess love isn't like a broken arm. "
Unable to answer, we walked the rest of the way in silence.
When I got home, I called my mother and scolded her for talking about this to my daughter.
Then I did what I had seen my brave little girl do that very afternoon.
I let go and agreed to meet Steve.
Steve was the man for me.
We married less than a year later.
It turned out my mother and my daughter were right.
A frail old man went to live with his son, daughter-in-law, and four-year-old grandson.
The old man's hands trembled, his eyesight was blurred, and his step faltered.
The family ate together at the table.
But the elderly grandfather's shaky hands and failing sight made eating difficult.
Peas rolled off his spoon onto the floor.
When he grasped the glass, milk spilled on the tablecloth.
The son and daughter-in-law became irritated with the mess. "
We must do something about Father," said the son. "
I've had enough of his spilled milk, noisy eating, and food on the floor. "
So the husband and wife set a small table in the corner.
There, grandfather ate alone while the rest of the family enjoyed dinner.
Since grandfather had broken a dish or two, his food was served in a wooden bowl.
When the family glanced in grandfather's direction, sometimes he had a tear in his eyes as he sat alone.
Still, the only words the couple had for him were sharp admonitions when he dropped a fork or spilled food.
The four-year-old grandson watched it all in silence.
One evening before supper, the father noticed his son playing with wood scraps on the floor.
He asked the child sweetly, "What are you making? "
Just as sweetly, the boy responded, "Oh, I am making a little bowl for you and Mama to eat your food in when I grow up. "
The four-year-old son smiled and went back to work.
The words so struck the parents so that they were speechless.
Then tears started to stream down their cheeks.
Though no word was spoken, both knew what must be done.
That evening the husband took grandfather's hand and gently led him back to the family.
For the remainder of his days he ate every meal with the family.
And for some reason, neither husband nor wife seemed to care any longer when a fork was dropped, milk spilled, or the tablecloth soiled.
Let's respect elders and the problems that arise from age.
Everyone of us will be old someday.
A man came home from work late again, tired and irritated, to find his five-year-old son waiting for him at the door. "
Daddy, may I ask you a question? "
" Yeah, sure, what is it?"
replied the man.
" Daddy, how much money do you make an hour? "
" That's none of your business.
What makes you ask such a thing? "
the man said angrily.
" I just want to know.
Please tell me, how much you make an hour? "
pleaded the little boy.
" If you must know, I make $20 an hour. "
" Oh," the little boy replied, head bowed.
Looking up, he said, "Daddy, may I borrow $10 please? "
The father was furious. "
If the only reason you wanted to know how much money I make is just so you can borrow some to buy a silly toy or some other nonsense, then you march yourself straight to your room and go to bed!
Think about why you're being so selfish.
I work long, hard hours everyday and don't have time for such childish games. "
The little boy quietly went to his room and shut the door.
The man sat down and started to get even madder about the little boy's questioning.
How dare he ask such questions only to get some money?
After an hour or so, the man had calmed down, and started to think he may have been a little hard on his son.
Maybe there was something he really needed to buy with that $10 and he really didn't ask for money very often.
The man went to the door of the little boy's room and opened the door.
"Are you asleep, son?"
he asked.
" No, daddy, I'm awake," replied the boy.
" I've been thinking, maybe I was too hard on you earlier," said the man. "
It's been a long day and I took my aggravation out on you.
Here's that $10 you asked for. "
The little boy sat straight up, beaming. "
Oh, thank you, daddy! "
he yelled.
Then, reaching under his pillow, he pulled out some more crumpled up bills.
The man, seeing that the boy already had money, started to get angry again.
The little boy slowly counted out his money, then looked up at the man. "
Why did you want more money if you already had some? "
the father grumbled.
" Because I didn't have enough, but now I do," the little boy replied.
" Daddy, I have $20 now.
Can I buy an hour of your time? "
Share $20 worth of time with someone you love - just a short reminder to all of us working so hard for our living.
However, let us not let time slip through our fingers without having spent some quality time with those who really matter to us.
One day, a poor boy who was trying to pay his way through school by selling goods door to door found that he only had one dime left.
He was hungry so he decided to beg for a meal at the next house.
However, he lost his nerve when a lovely young woman opened the door.
Instead of a meal he asked for a drink of water.
She thought he looked hungry so she brought him a large glass of milk.
He drank it slowly, and then asked, "How much do I owe you? "
" You don't owe me anything," she replied. "
Mother has taught me never to accept pay for a kindness. "
He said, "Then I thank you from the bottom of my heart."
As Colin White left that house, he not only felt stronger physically, but it also increased his faith in the human race.
He was about to give up and quit before this point.
Years later the young woman became critically ill.
The local doctors were baffled.
They finally sent her to the big city, where specialists can be called in to study her rare disease.
Dr. Colin White, now famous, was called in for the consultation.
When he heard the name of the town she came from, a strange light filled his eyes.
Immediately, he rose and went down through the hospital hall into her room.
Dressed in his doctor's gown he went in to see her.
He recognized her at once.
He went back to the consultation room and determined to do his best to save her life.
From that day on, he gave special attention to her case.
After a long struggle, the battle was won.
Dr. White requested the business office to pass the final bill to him for approval.
He looked at it and then wrote something on the side.
The bill was sent to her room.
She was afraid to open it because she was positive that it would take the rest of her life to pay it off.
Finally she looked, and the note on the side of the bill caught her attention.
She read these words…
"Paid in full with a glass of milk. "
(Signed) Dr. Colin White
Tears of joy flooded her eyes as she prayed silently: "Thank you.
The love has spread through human hearts and hands. "
The story goes that two friends were walking through the desert.
During some point of the journey they had an argument, and one friend slapped the other one in the face.
The one who got slapped was hurt, but without saying anything, wrote in the sand: "Today my best friend slapped me in the face. "
They kept on walking until they found an oasis, where they decided to take a bath.
The one who had been slapped got stuck in the mire and started drowning, but the friend saved him.
After he recovered from the near drowning, he wrote on a stone: "Today my best friend saved my life. "
The friend who had slapped and saved his best friend asked him, "After I hurt you, you wrote in the sand and now you write on a stone.
Why? "
The other friend replied, "When someone hurts us we should write it down in sand where winds of forgiveness can erase it away.
But when someone does something good for us, we must engrave it in stone where no wind ever erases it. "
LEARN TO WRITE YOUR HURTS IN THE SAND AND TO CARVE YOUR BENEFITS IN STONE.
They say it takes a minute to find a special person, an hour to appreciate them, a day to love them, but an entire life to forget them.
Send this phrase to the people you'll never forget.
It's a short message to let them know that you'll never forget them.
Take the time to live.
I was sure that I was to be killed.
I became terribly nervous.
I fumbled in my pockets to see if there were any cigarettes, which had escaped their search.
I found one and because of my shaking hands, I could barely get it to my lips.
But I had no matches; they had taken those.
I looked through the bars at my jailer.
He did not make eye contact with me.
I called out to him, "Have you got a light? "
He looked at me, shrugged and came over to light my cigarette.
As he came close and lit the match, his eyes inadvertently locked with mine.
At that moment, I smiled.
I don't know why I did that.
Perhaps it was nervousness , perhaps it was because, when you get very close, one to another, it is very hard not to smile.
In any case, I smiled.
In that instant, it was as though a spark jumped across the gap between our two hearts, our two human souls.
I know he didn't want to, but my smile leaped through the bars and generated a smile on his lips, too.
He lit my cigarette but stayed near, looking at me directly in the eyes and continuing to smile.
I kept smiling at him, now aware of him as a person and not just a jailer.
And his looking at me seemed to have a new dimension too.
" Do you have kids? "
he asked.
" Yes, here, here. "
I took out my wallet and nervously fumbled for the pictures of my family.
He, too, took out the pictures of his family and began to talk about his plans and hopes for them.
My eyes filled with tears.
I said that I feared that I'd never see my family again, never have the chance to see them grow up.
Tears came to his eyes, too.
Suddenly, without another word, he unlocked my cell and silently led me out.
Out of the jail, quietly and by back routes, out of the town.
There, at the edge of town, he released me.
And without another word, he turned back toward the town.
My life was saved by a smile.
Yes, the smile - the unaffected, unplanned, natural connection between people.
I really believe that if that part of you and that part of me could recognize each other, we wouldn't be enemies.
We couldn't have hate or envy or fear.
She always wore a flower in her hair.
Always.
Mostly I thought it looked strange.
A flower in midday?
To work?
To professional meetings?
She was an aspiring graphic designer in the large, busy office where I worked.
Every day she'd sail into the office with its extra-modern crisp décor, wearing a flower in her shoulder-length hair.
Usually color-coordinated with her otherwise suitable attire, it bloomed, a small parasol of vivid color, pinned to the large backdrop of dark brunette waves.
There were times, like at the company Christmas party, where the flower added a touch of festivity and seemed appropriate.
But to work, it just seemed out of place.
Some of the more "professionally-minded" women in the office were practically indignant about it, and thought someone ought to take her aside and inform her of the "rules" in being "taken seriously" in the business world.
Others among us, myself included, thought it just an odd quirk.
To my knowledge, no one had questioned the young woman as to why a flower accompanied her to work each day.
In fact, we probably would have been more inclined to question her had she shown up without it.
Which she did one day.
When she delivered a project to my office, I queried. "
I noticed there is no flower in your hair today," I said casually, "I'm so used to seeing you wear one that it almost seems as if something is missing. "
" Oh, yes," she replied quietly, in a rather sober tone.
This was a departure from her usual bright and perky personality.
The following pregnant pause prompted me to ask, "Are you okey? "
Though I was hoping for a "Yes, I'm fine. "
response, intuitively, I knew I had treaded onto something bigger than a missing flower.
" Oh," she said softly, with an expression encumbered with recollection and sorrow. "
Today is the anniversary of my mother's death.
I miss her so much.
I guess I'm a bit blue. "
" I understand," I said, feeling compassion for her but not wanting to wade into emotional waters. "
I'm sure it's very difficult for you to talk about," I continued, the business part of me hoping she would agree, but my heart understanding that there was more.
" No, it's okay, really.
I know that I'm extraordinarily sensitive today.
This is a day of mourning, I suppose.
You see…" and she began to tell me the story.
" My mother knew she was losing her life to cancer.
Eventually, she died.
I was 15 at the time.
We were very close.
She was so loving, so giving.
Because she knew she was dying, she prerecorded a birthday message I was to watch every year on my birthday, from age 16 until I reached 25.
Today is my 25th birthday, and this morning I watched the video she prepared for this day.
I guess I'm still digesting it.
And wishing she were alive. "
" Well, my heart goes out to you," I said, really feeling a great deal of empathy for her.
"Thank you for your kindness," she said. "
Oh, and about the missing flower you asked about.
When I was a little girl, my mother would often put flowers in my hair.
One day when she was in the hospital, I took her this beautiful large rose from her garden.
As I held it up to her nose so she could smell it, she took it from me, and without saying a word, pulled me close to her, stroking my hair and brushing it from my face, placed it in my hair, just as she had done when I was little.
She died later that day. "
Tears came to her eyes as she added, "I've just always worn a flower in my hair since - it made me feel as though she were with me, if only in spirit.
But," she sighed, "today, as I watched the video designed for me on this birthday, in it she said she was sorry for not being able to be there as I grew up, that she hoped she had been a good parent, and that she would like a sign that I was becoming self-sufficient. "
She looked at me, smiling fondly at the memory, "She was so wise. "
I nodded, agreeing, "Yes, she sounds very wise. "
" So I thought, a sign, what could it be?
And it seemed it was the flower that had to go.
But I'll miss it, and what it represents. "
Her hazel eyes gazed off in recollection as she continued. "
I was so lucky to have had her. "
Her voice trailed off and she met my eyes again, then smiled sadly. "
But I don't need to wear a flower to be reminded of these things.
I really do know that.
It was just an outward sign of my treasured memories - they're still there even with the flower gone… but still, I will miss it … Oh, here's the project.
I hope it meets with you approval. "
She handed me the neatly prepared folder, signed, with a hand-drawn flower, her signature trademark, below her name.
That day I knew that the flower this young woman wore in her hair was symbolic of her outpouring of love - a way for her to stay connected to the young mother she had lost when she herself was a young girl.
I looked over the project she had completed, and felt honored that it had been treated by one with such depth and capacity for feeling.
No wonder her work was consistently excellent.
She lived in her heart daily, and caused me to revisit mine.
I ask for a moment's indulgence to sit by thy side.
The works that I have in hand I will finish afterwards.
Away from the sight of thy face my heart knows no rest nor respite, and my work becomes an endless toil in a shoreless sea of toil.
To-day the summer has come at my window with its sighs and murmurs; and the bees are plying their minstrelsy at the court of the flowering grove.
Now it is time to sit quiet, face to face with thee, and to sing dedication of life in this silent and overflowing leisure.
I am forever walking upon these shores, betwixt the sand and the foam.
The high tide will erase my footprints, and the wind will blow away the foam.
But the sea and the shore will remain forever.
It was but yesterday I thought myself a fragment quivering without rhythm in the sphere of life.
Now I know that I am the sphere, and all life in the rhythmic fragment moves within me.
Remembrance is a form of meeting.
Forgetfulness is a form of freedom.
My house says to me, "Do not leave me, for here dwells your past. "
And the road says to me, "Come and follow me, for I am your future. "
And I say to both my house and the road, "I have no past, nor have I a future.
If I stay here, there is a going in my staying; if I go, there is a staying in my going.
Only love and death will change all things. "
Strange, the desire for certain pleasure is a part of my pain.
Seven times have I despised my soul:
The first time when I saw her being meek that she might attain height.
The second time when I saw her limping before the crippled.
The third time when she was given to choose between the hard and the easy, and she chose the easy.
The forth time when she committed wrong, and comforted herself that others also committed wrong.
The fifth time when she forbore for weakness, and attributed her patience to strength.
The sixth time when she despised the ugliness of a face, and knew not that it was one of her own masks.
And the seventh time when she sang a song of praise, and deemed it a virtue.
There is a space between man's imagination and man's attainment that may only be traversed by his longing.
Our mind is a sponge; our heart is a stream.
Is it not strange that most of us choose sucking rather than running?
The reality of the other person is not in what he reveals to you, but in what he cannot reveal to you.
Therefore, if you would understand him, listen not to what he says but rather to what he does not say.
The sense of humor is a sense of proportion.
A truth is to be known always, to be uttered sometimes.
The voice of life in me cannot reach the ear of life in you; but let us talk that we may not feel lonely.
When two women talk they say nothing; when one woman speaks she reveals all of life.
Now let us play hide and seek!
Should you hide in my heart, it would not be difficult to find you.
But should you hide behind your own shell, then it would be useless for anyone to seek you.
A mad man is not less a musician than you or myself; only the instrument on which he plays is a little out of tune.
Generosity is not in giving me that which I need more than you do, but it is in giving me that which you need more than I do.
We often borrow from our tomorrows to pay our debts to our yesterdays.
If your heart is a volcano, how shall you expect flowers to bloom in your hands?
It is only when you are pursued that you become swift.
Oftentimes I have hated in self-defense; but if I were stronger, I would not have used such a weapon.
Strange that you should pity the slow-footed and not the slow-minded, and the blind-eyed rather than the blind-hearted.
Life is a procession.
The slow of foot finds it so swift that he steps out; and the swift of foot finds it too slow and he also steps out.
I would be the least among men with dreams and the desire to fulfill them, rather than the greatest with no dreams and no desires.
We are all climbing towards the summit of our heart's desire.
If the other climber steal your sack and your purse and wax fat on the one and heavy on the other, you should pity him.
The climbing will be harder for his flesh, and the burden will make his way longer.
And should you in your leanness see his flesh puffing upward, help him a step; it would add your swiftness.
You cannot judge any man beyond your knowledge of him, and how small is your knowledge!
Strife in nature is but disorder longing for order.
Death is not nearer to the aged than to the newborn; neither is life.
Wisdom ceases to be wisdom when it becomes too proud to weep, too grave to laugh, and too self-ful to seek other than itself.
Had I filled myself with all that you know, what room should I have for all that you do not know?
I have learned silence from the talkative, toleration from the intolerant, and kindness from the unkind; yet strange, I am ungrateful to these teachers.
A bigot is a stone-deaf orator.
If you can see only what light reveals and hear only what sound announces, then in truth you do not see nor do you hear.
A shy failure is nobler than an immodest success.
He who listens to truth is not less than he who utters truth.
Generosity is giving more than you can, and pride is taking less than you need.
When either your joy or your sorrow becomes great, the world becomes small.
Desire is half of life; indifference is half of death.
If you reveal your secrets to the wind, you should not blame the wind for revealing them to the trees.
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate;
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance or nature's changing course untrimm'd;
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;
Nor shall Death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st:
So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
The thing that goes the farthest toward making life worthwhile,
That costs the least and does the most, is just a pleasant smile.
The smile that bubbles from the heart that loves its fellow men,
Will drive away the clouds of gloom and coax the sun again.
It's full of worth and goodness, too, with manly kindness blunt;
It's worth a million dollars, and it doesn't cost a cent.
There is no room for sadness when we see a cheery smile;
It always has the same good look; it's never out of style;
It nerves us on to try again when failure makes us blue;
The dimples of encouragement are good for me and you.
It pays the highest interest - for it is merely lent;
It's worth a million dollars, and it doesn't cost a cent.
A smile comes very easy - you can wrinkle up with cheer,
A hundred times before you can squeeze out a salty tear;
It ripples out, moreover, to the heartstrings that will tug,
And always leaves and echo that is very like a hug.
So, smile away!
Folks understand what by a smile is meant;
It's worth a million dollars, and it doesn't cost a cent.
I have reached illusion's end
In this grove of falling leaves,
Each leaf a signal of past joy,
Drifting sere within my heart.
Some were loves of youthful days?
Blazing meteors in a distant sky,
Extinguished, vanished without trace,
Or dropped before me, stiff and cold as ice.
Some were boisterous friendships,
Fullblown blossoms, innocent of coming fall.
Society dammed the pulsing blood,
Life cast molten passion in reality's shell.
Another joy, the spell of high ideals,
Drew me through many a twisting mile of thorn.
To suffer for ideals is no pain;
But oh, to see them mocked and scorned!
Now nothing remains but remorse?
Daily punishment for past pride.
When the glory of the sky stands condemned,
In this wasteland, what colour survive?
There is one tree that stands alone intact,
It thrives, I know, on my suffering's lifeblood.
Its greenshade mocks me ruthlessly!
O wisdom tree!
I curse your every growing bud.
The morning sea of silence broke into ripples of bird songs; and the flowers were all merry by the roadside; and the wealth of gold was scattered through the rift of the clouds while we busily went on our way and paid no heed.
We sang no glad songs nor played; we went not to the village for barter; we spoke not a word nor smiled; we lingered not on the way.
We quickened our pace more and more as the time sped by.
The sun rose to the mid sky and doves cooed in the shade.
Withered leaves danced and whirled in the hot air of noon.
The shepherd boy drowsed and dreamed in the shadow of the banyan tree, and I laid myself down by the water and stretched my tired limbs on the grass.
My companions laughed at me in scorn; they held their heads high and hurried on; they never looked back nor rested; they vanished in the distant blue haze.
They crossed many meadows and hills, and passed through strange, faraway countries.
All honour to you, heroic host of the interminable path!
Mockery and reproach pricked me to rise, but found no response in me.
I gave myself up for lost in the depth of a glad humiliation - in the shadow of a dim delight.
The repose of the sun-embroidered green gloom slowly spread over my heart.
I forgot for what I had travelled, and I surrendered my mind without struggle to the maze of shadows and songs.
At last, when I woke from my slumber and opened my eyes, I saw thee standing by me, flooding my sleep with thy smile.
How I had feared that the path was long and wearisome, and the struggle to reach thee was hard!
How many roads must a man walk down
Before you call him a man?
How many seas must a white dove sail
Before she sleeps in the sand?
How many times must the cannon balls fly
Before they're forever banned?
The answer, my friend, is blowing in the wind,
The answer is blowing in the wind.
How many times must a man look up
Before he can see the sky?
How many ears must one man have
Before he can hear people cry?
How many deaths will it take till he knows
That too many people have died?
The answer, my friend, is blowing in the wind,
The answer is blowing in the wind.
How many years can a mountain exist
Before it's washed to the sea?
How many years can some people exist
Before they're allowed to be free?
How many times can a man turn his head,
Pretending he just doesn't see?
The answer, my friend, is blowing in the wind,
The answer is blowing in the wind.
Four score and seven years ago, our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
Now, we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure.
We are met on a great battlefield of that war.
We have come to dedicate a portion of that field as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live.
It is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this.
But, in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate, we cannot consecrate, we cannot hallow this ground.
The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have consecrated it far above our poor power to add or detract.
The world will little note nor long remember what we say here, but it can never forget what they did here.
It is for us, the living, rather, to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced.
It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us; that from these honored dead, we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion; that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain; that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom; and that government of the people, by the people, and for the people, shall not perish from the earth.
Tonight is a particular honor for me because, let's face it, my presence on this stage is pretty unlikely.
My father was a foreign student, born and raised in a small village in Kenya.
He grew up herding goats, went to school in a tin-roof shack.
His father, my grandfather, was a cook, a domestic servant to the British.
But my grandfather had larger dreams for his son.
Through hard work and perseverance, my father got a scholarship to study in a magical place: America, that shone as a beacon of freedom and opportunity to so many who had come before.
While studying here, my father met my mother.
She was born in a town on the other side of the world, in Kansas.
Her father worked on oil rigs and farms through most of the Depression.
The day after Pearl Harbor, my grandfather signed up for duty, joined Patton's army, marched across Europe.
Back home, my grandmother raised a baby and went to work on a bomber assembly line.
After the war, they studied on the Gl Bill, bought a house through FHA, and later moved west, all the way to Hawaii, in search of opportunity.
And they, too, had big dreams for their daughter, a common dream, born of two continents.
My parents shared not only an improbable love, they shared an abiding faith in the possibilities of this nation.
They would give me an African name, Barack, or "blessed," believing that in a tolerant America your name is no barrier to success.
They imagined me going to the best schools in the land, even though they weren't rich, because in a generous America you don't have to be rich to achieve your potential.
They are both passed away now.
Yet, I know that, on this night, they look down on me with great pride.
Elegant, passionate, a strong career woman and a devoted mom, Michelle Obama has already become a role model with an army of fans as she prepares to become the nation's First Lady.
Three days after celebrating her 45th birthday, she will take her place by her husband's side on Jan 20 as Barack Obama is sworn in as the nation's first African-American president.
Michelle Obama will be one of the nation's youngest first ladies after the graceful Jackie Kennedy, who was just 31 when John F. Kennedy took office.
And while she has insisted that her main job will be "mom-in-chief" to her two daughters, Malia, 10 and Sasha, 7, her role may well evolve in the months ahead as the first family settles into the White House.
Officially Michelle Obama has said she has no political ambitions of her own, and resigned from her job as vice-president at the University of Chicago medical center, where she worked for 7 years.
" Even as First Lady, my number one job would still be mom," she told reporters just before the Nov 4 elections. "
My first priority will always be to ensure that our daughters stay grounded and healthy, with normal childhoods - including homework, dance and soccer. "
" One of the great challenges for Michelle Obama is she is going to have to juggle many balls, wear many hats," historian Robert Watson said.
" She's going to have to be a wife, a mother, but also the First Lady.
And this is a woman who is used to having a very successful, high-powered career and it's an enormous challenge. "
He added, "My sense is that Michelle Obama probably comes better prepared to handle these challenges than any first lady in history.
The reason is that she has sort of been super woman. "
" First Lady" is an unofficial title bestowed on the hostess of the White House.
Helped by a staff of around 100, she has many largely ceremonial duties and accompanies the president to state functions and on trips.
In all this Cuban business there is one man stands out on the horizon of my memory like Mars at perihelion.
When war broke out between Spain and the United States, it was very necessary to communicate quickly with the leader of the Insurgents.
Garcia was somewhere in the mountain fastnesses of Cuba - no one knew where.
No mail or telegraph message could reach him.
The President must secure his cooperation, and quickly.
What to do!
Someone said to the President, "There's a fellow by the name of Rowan who will find Garcia for you, if anybody can. "
Rowan was sent for and given a letter to be delivered to Garcia.
How "the fellow by the name of Rowan" took the letter, sealed it up in an oilskin pouch, strapped it over his heart, in four days landed by night off the coast of Cuba from an open boat, disappeared into the jungle, and in three weeks came out on the other side of the Island, having traversed a hostile country on foot and delivered his letter to Garcia, are things I have no special desire now to tell in detail.
The point that I wish to make is this: McKinley gave Rowan a letter to be delivered to Garcia; Rowan took the letter and did not ask, "Where is he at? "
By the Eternal!
There is a man whose form should be cast in deathless bronze and the statue placed in every college of the land.
It is not book-learning young men need, nor instruction about this and that, but a stiffening of the vertebrae which will cause them to be loyal to a trust, to act promptly, concentrate their energies; do the thing - "Carry a message to Garcia. "
General Garcia is dead now, but there are other Garcias.
No man who has endeavored to carry out an enterprise where many hands were needed, but has been well-nigh appalled at times by the imbecility of the average man - the inability or unwillingness to concentrate on a thing and do it.
Slipshod assistance, foolish inattention, dowdy indifference, and halfhearted work seem the rule; and no man succeeds, unless by hook or crook or threat he forces or bribes other men to assist him; or mayhap, God in His goodness performs a miracle, and sends him an Angel of Light for an assistant.
You, reader, put this matter to a test: You are sitting now in your office - six clerks are within call.
Summon any one and make this request: "Please look in the encyclopedia and make a brief memorandum for me concerning the life of Correggio. "
Will the clerk quietly say, "Yes, sir. "
and go do the task?
On your life he will not.
He will look at you out of a fishy eye and ask one or more of the following questions: Who was he?
Which encyclopedia?
Where is the encyclopedia?
Was I hired for that?
Don't you mean Bismarck?
What's the matter with Charlie doing it?
Is he dead?
Is there any hurry?
Shan't I bring you the book and let you look it up yourself?
What do you want to know for?
And I will lay you ten to one that after you have answered the questions, and explained how to find the information, and why you want it, the clerk will go off and get one of the other clerks to help him try to find Garcia - and then come back and tell you there is no such man.
Of course I may lose my bet, but according to the Law of Average, I will not.
Now, if you are wise, you will not bother to explain to your "assistant" that Correggio is indexed under the C's, not in the K's, but you will smile very sweetly and say, "Never mind," and go look it up yourself.
And this incapacity for independent action, this moral stupidity, this infirmity of the will, this unwillingness to cheerfully catch hold and lift, are the things that put pure Socialism so far into the future.
If men will not act for themselves, what will they do when the benefit of their effort is for all?
A first mate with knotted club seems necessary; and the dread of getting "the bounce" Saturday night holds many a worker in his place.
Advertise for a stenographer, and nine out of ten who apply can neither spell nor punctuate - and do not think it necessary to.
Can such a one write a letter to Garcia?
" You see that bookkeeper," said the foreman to me in a large factory.
" Yes.
What about him? "
" Well, he's a fine accountant, but if I'd send him up town on an errand, he might accomplish the errand all right, and on the other hand, might stop at four saloons on the way, and when he got to Main Street, would forget what he had been sent for. "
Can such a man be entrusted to carry a message to Garcia?
We have recently been hearing much maudlin sympathy expressed for the "downtrodden denizen of the sweat-shop" and the "homeless wanderer searching for honest employment", and with it all often go many hard words for the men in power.
Nothing is said about the employer who grows old before his time in a vain attempt to get frowsy ne'er-do-wells to do intelligent work; and his long, patient striving with "help" that does nothing but loaf when his back is turned.
In every store and factory there is a constant weeding-out process going on.
The employer is constantly sending away "help" that have shown their incapacity to further the interests of the business, and others are being taken on.
No matter how good times are, this sorting continues, only if times are hard and work is scarce, the sorting is done finer - but out and forever out the incompetent and unworthy go.
It is the survival of the fittest.
Self-interest prompts every employer to keep the best - those who can carry a message to Garcia.
I know one man of really brilliant parts who has not the ability to manage a business of his own, and yet who is absolutely worthless to anyone else, because he carries with him constantly the insane suspicion that his employer is oppressing, or intending to oppress him.
He cannot give orders, and he will not receive them.
Should a message be given him to take to Garcia, his answer would probably be, "Take it yourself! "
Of course, I know that one so morally deformed is no less to be pitied than a physical cripple; but in our pitying let us drop a tear, too, for the men who are striving to carry on a great enterprise, whose working hours are not limited by the whistle, and whose hair is fast turning white through the struggle to hold in line dowdy indifference, slipshod imbecility, and the heartless ingratitude, which, but for their enterprise, would be both hungry and homeless.
Have I put the matter too strongly?
Possibly I have; but when all the world has gone a-slumming I wish to speak a word of sympathy for the man who succeeds - the man who, against great odds, has directed the efforts of others, and having succeeded, finds there's nothing in it: nothing but bare board and clothes.
I have carried a dinner-pail and worked for day's wages, and I have also been an employer of labor, and I know there is something to be said on both sides.
There is no excellence, per se, in poverty; rags are no recommendation; and all employers are not rapacious and highhanded, any more than all poor men are virtuous.
My heart goes out to the man who does his work when the "boss" is away, as well as when he is at home.
And the man who, when given a letter for Garcia, quietly takes the missive, without asking any idiotic questions, and with no lurking intention of chucking it into the nearest sewer, or of doing aught else but deliver it, never gets "laid off", nor has to go on a strike for higher wages.
Civilization is one long, anxious search for just such individuals.
Anything such a man asks shall be granted.
He is wanted in every city, town and village - in every office, shop, store and factory.
The world cries out for such, he is needed and needed badly - the man who can "Carry a Message to Garcia. "