The blue whale is the largest animal on Earth.
In fact, it is likely the largest animal that has ever lived.
Like all whales, it is a mammal.
About every ten to twenty minutes, it must come to the surface to breathe.
Blue whales live in all oceans on Earth.
There used to be more than two hundred thousand blue whales on the planet.
However, for many years, blue whales were hunted for their oil and body parts.
They were close to extinction in the 1960s, when laws were passed to protect them.
Today the blue whale remains an endangered species.
Scientists and conservationists are working to study these huge animals and to help them survive.
Before laws were made to limit whale hunting, people hunted many types of whales, like this sperm whale.
Vocabulary
Mammals are warm-blooded animals that breathe air, have a spine, and feed their young with milk produced by the mother.
A blue whale may be more than 100 feet (30 meters) long.
This is about the length of three school buses.
Females are usually longer than males.
An elephant and a human look tiny when they are compared to the enormous blue whale.
Think About It
The adult blue whale has no natural predator.
What might be a reason for this?
Blue whales can weigh 150 tons or more.
That means one blue whale may be heavier than thirty elephants.
Just the heart of one blue whale can weigh about 1,500 pounds (700 kilograms).
The blue whale's body is blue-gray in color with some white or lighter gray areas.
The animals' bellies are white but sometimes look yellowish.
The yellow color comes from the thousands of tiny yellowish-green creatures that live on the skin of a blue whale.
Blue whales have smooth, flexible skin and flat heads.
Their slippery skin and long shape help them glide through the water.
Near a blue whale's mouth are grooves called ventral pleats.
The pleats let the mouth stretch widely as the whale eats.
On the top of their heads, blue whales have blowholes.
These are two holes similar to nostrils.
They allow the whale to breathe when it comes to the surface of the water.
A blue whale's two blowholes are protected by a large splashguard, which helps keep water out.
Blue whales have a strong tail with two curved flat sections called flukes.
They have a small fin at the top of their back near the tail.
They also have two flippers on their chest, called pectoral flippers.
Blue whales use their tails for swimming and diving.
Their flippers are mostly for steering or for slowing down.
On the blue whale's throat and chest are eighty to one hundred long grooves.
The grooves let the whale's mouth stretch widely.
Instead of teeth, the mouth contains a structure called baleen.
The baleen has bristles that trap small prey.
About three hundred baleen plates hang from a blue whale's top jaw.
Baleen is made of a protein called keratin, also found in human hair.
Vocabulary
Prey are animals hunted or killed by another animal for food.
Blue whales are found in all the world's oceans.
Some live in the northern Pacific and Atlantic oceans.
Others live around Antarctica.
There are more blue whales in southern oceans than in northern areas.
Many blue whales travel during the year.
For example, in the summer they may feed in cold waters near the North or South Pole.
Then, in the winter they may move to warmer waters to mate.
Some blue whales live all year round in the same place.
Blue whales often travel thousands of miles during the year.
Think About It
Most blue whales travel long distances every year.
Which parts of a blue whale's body help it to travel?
Because blue whales often dive deep below the surface to feed, they usually stay in deeper water.
But sometimes they come closer to coastal areas to feed in the shallower waters.
Blue whales usually feed at depths of up to 300 feet (100 m).
Blue whales live alone or in small groups.
They can travel as fast as 20 miles (32 kilometers) or more per hour.
They must come to the surface of the water for air every ten to twenty minutes.
The blow of a blue whale is the air, water, and mucus it spouts when it comes to the surface.
Whales do not sleep deeply like humans do.
They need to keep part of their brain awake in order to take a breath.
Whales rest half of their brain at a time, taking very short naps near the water's surface.
After a dive, a blue whale will blow eight to fifteen times.
These spouts can be as high as 33 feet (10 m).
Think About It
After a feeding season, blue whales can go without eating for months.
How can blue whales survive so long without food?
Blue whales feast on many tiny shrimplike creatures called krill.
First they take in a huge mouthful of water.
Then they use their enormous tongues to push the water out through their baleen plates.
The baleen traps thousands of tiny krill that the whale then swallows.
A single adult whale can swallow several tons of krill each day.
Sound travels about five times faster in water than it does in air.
This may be why blue whales use sound for survival.
Blue whales have excellent hearing.
They can hear sounds that the human ear cannot.
Blue whales can also make sounds, such as clicks and low noises, that only other whales can hear.
Scientists think that a blue whale may produce certain sounds to attract a mate.
Compare and Contrast
Noise from ships and other underwater machines has increased greatly over the last one hundred years.
How has this changed the way blue whales hear and communicate?
The blue whale is also the loudest animal on the planet!
It is even louder than a jet engine.
It can make noises that travel thousands of miles underwater.
Scientists think that blue whales communicate to find one another, to help each other find food, or to find a new mate.
The loud, low noises that whales make are called songs.
This photo shows a whale song in graph form.
About one year after mating, a female blue whale gives birth to one baby, called a calf.
The newborn whale is about 25 feet (8 m) long.
Newborns already weigh about 6,000 pounds (2,700 kg).
A calf can drink 100 gallons (380 liters) of its mother's rich milk a day.
This helps it gain 200 pounds (90 kg) and grow more than 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) every day.
Blue whale calves stay with their mothers for about the first year of their lives.
Calves can swim from the moment they are born.
They spend the first several months of their lives in warmer ocean water.
When a blue whale calf is about six months old, it will begin to feed on krill and travel on its own.
Blue whales become fully mature adults between the ages of six to ten years.
They can usually live for about eighty to ninety years.
Blue whale calves nurse on their mother's milk for at least the first six months of life.
Vocabulary
Krill are tiny shrimplike animals that live in the ocean.
They belong to the group of animals called crustaceans.
An endangered species is any type of plant or animal that is in danger of disappearing forever.
If a species, or type, of plant or animal dies out completely, it becomes extinct.
Animals and plants depend on each other and on their environment to survive.
When their environment, or habitat, changes or is destroyed, plants and animals may not be able to survive.
They then become endangered.
Some whales wash ashore after being killed by ships.
This blue whale washed up on a beach.
Think About It
When humans bring a new species of plant or animal to an environment, it can endanger an animal or plant already living in that environment.
What are some reasons that might happen?
Natural disasters or changes in the climate can harm or destroy habitats.
Humans pollute habitats with garbage, car fumes, and factory wastes.
Humans destroy habitats by clearing land for roads, buildings, and farms.
They also may hunt and kill too many of certain types of animals.
Though some of the garbage in the ocean comes to shore, much of it floats in the ocean.
In the 1960s, people became aware that many species were endangered.
Today, many countries have made it illegal to harm, capture, kill, or sell endangered species.
In addition, many organizations work to keep endangered species from becoming extinct.
The International Union for Conservation of Nature keeps lists of endangered species.
The Nature Conservancy and the World Wildlife Fund help to set aside land for threatened wildlife.
Before the 1966 ban on whaling, many whale species were endangered.
Compare and Contrast
Humans can help animals that live on land increase their population.
Why might it be harder for humans to help endangered sea creatures like blue whales do the same?
Nature preserves and zoos help endangered animals to reproduce.
Such programs have helped to increase the populations of the black-footed ferret, the California condor, and other endangered animals.
In 1982, the total California condor population was just twenty-two.
However, its population has increased since it was put on the endangered species list.
In the 1800s, people began hunting whales in large numbers for their meat, bones, blubber, and baleen.
The blubber was boiled and turned into oil that was used for cooking or as fuel in lamps.
During the 1930–1931 whaling season, as many as 29,000 blue whales were killed.
Scientists believe humans killed 350,000 blue whales during the years that whales were hunted.
Then in 1966, the International Whaling Commission made it illegal to kill blue whales.
In 1986, the organization limited the hunting of all types of whales.
However, a few countries continue to hunt whales.
As whaling equipment and ships improved, many more whales were killed.
Scientists are not sure of the exact population of blue whales.
However, they believe today there are between 10,000 and 25,000 in the world.
Blue whales are still an endangered species.
Before electricity, many people used oil lamps for light.
Whale blubber could be turned into oil for these lamps.
Vocabulary
Blubber is the layer of fat found underneath a whale's skin.
Although blue whales are now protected from whaling, they face other problems.
Blue whales are sometimes hit by large ships and either injured or killed.
They also can become tangled in fishing gear that is left behind in the ocean.
This can slow them down or cut their skin and cause infections, making them sick.
Climate change also affects whales.
The world's oceans are growing warmer.
The krill that whales rely on as a food source can live only in cooler water.
With less krill in the ocean, blue whales will have less to eat.
Large ships often hit whales.
Sometimes whales die from the injuries caused by these ships.
Compare and Contrast
Animals living in any environment can face problems from pollution.
What are some examples of pollution that can be especially harmful to ocean animals?
Pollution in the ocean, such as garbage and chemicals, can kill whales.
Chemicals can build up in a whale's blubber and harm it slowly.
Noise pollution from ships can change how whales hear and communicate.
Rising sea levels from melting polar ice caps will affect people and animals on land, as well as those creatures living in the world's oceans.
The International Whaling Commission is in charge of protecting all whales.
It enforces the laws against whaling.
It is working to stop any country from continuing to hunt whales.
It also works with conservation groups to try to improve the condition of the world's oceans.
In the waters around Antarctica and throughout the Indian Ocean, there are whale sanctuaries.
In these protected areas, blue whales are less likely to be hit by ships.
Australia has set up a sanctuary in the waters off its coast.
Hawaii established a whale sanctuary for humpback whales.
Vocabulary
Sanctuaries are places that provide shelter or protection.
Scientists are also studying blue whales to find ways to better protect them and help increase their population.
Scientists have tagged some blue whales with devices that send out signals.
These signals tell scientists where the blue whales travel so they can learn more about the lives of the animals.
This blue whale was tagged with a satellite tracker in the Santa Barbara Channel off the coast of California.
Everyone can play a part in helping blue whales to thrive.
Things humans do can have a big effect on the plants and animals that share our world.
Here are a few things everyone can do: Help keep the world's oceans clean by not polluting.
Conserve energy to slow down global warming so the ocean will stay at the right temperature for whales and their food sources.
Join a conservation group that works to stop whaling and help clean the oceans.
People can work together to clean up trash that is already in our oceans.
Think About It
Whales have just one baby at a time, and they have a baby every two or three years.
How do you think these two facts affect how quickly the blue whale population can increase?
Blue whales are the largest creatures ever to have lived on Earth, and they have been around for a very long time.
If humans help keep them safe and keep their environment clean, perhaps they will be around for many more years to come.
Some populations of blue whales are recovering, but there is still much work to be done.
BRISTLE A short stiff hair or something like a hair.
CLIMATE The weather found in a certain place over a long period of time.
CONSERVATIONIST A person who works to protect things found in nature.
FUEL A material used to produce heat or power by burning.
FUME A disagreeable smoke or gas.
GROOVE A long, narrow channel made in a surface.
HABITAT The place or type of place where a plant or animal naturally or normally lives or grows.
INFECTION An illness caused by a germ or parasite.
NATURE PRESERVE Area set aside to protect plants and animals.
PECTORAL Located in, near, or on the chest.
POLLUTE To damage nature with waste made by humans.
POPULATION A group of one or more species of organisms living in a particular area or habitat.
PREDATOR An animal that obtains food mostly by killing and eating other animals.
PROCESS To take in information and organize it for use in a variety of ways.
SPECIES A group of plants or animals of the same kind and with the same name.
THRIVE To do well or grow in number.