Now Chil the Kite brings home the night
That Mang the Bat sets free -
The herds are shut in barn and hut,
For loosed till dawn are we.
This is the hour of pride and power,
Talon and tush and claw.
Oh, hear the call!
Good hunting, all
That keep the Jungle Law!
- Night Song in the Jungle
It was seven o'clock on a very warm evening in the Seeonee hills.
Father Wolf woke up from his day's rest, scratched himself, and yawned.
He spread out his paws to get rid of the sleepy feeling in their tips.
Mother Wolf lay with her big, gray nose across her four tumbling, squealing cubs.
The moon shone into the mouth of the cave where they all lived.
"Augrh!" said Father Wolf.
"It is time to hunt again.." " He was going to spring downhill when a little shadow with a bushy tail crossed the threshold.
It whined, "Good luck go with you, O Chief of the Wolves.
Good luck and strong white teeth go with noble children.
May they never forget the hungry in this world."
It was the Jackal, Tabaqui the Dish-licker.
The wolves of India despise Tabaqui because he runs about making mischief and telling tales.
But they are afraid of him, too.
More than anyone else in the jungle, Tabaqui is apt to go mad.
Then he forgets that he is ever afraid of anyone and runs through the forest biting everything in his way.
Even the tiger runs and hides when little Tabaqui goes mad.
Madness is the most disgraceful thing that can overtake a wild creature.
We call it rabies, but they call it dewanee - the madness - and run.
"Enter and look, then," said Father Wolf stiffly. "
But there is no food here."
"For a wolf, no," said Tabaqui. "
But for myself a dry bone is a good feast.
Who are the Gidur-log - the Jackal People
- to pick and choose?"
He scuttled to the back of the cave.
He found the bone of a buck with some meat on it and sat cracking the end merrily.
"All thanks for this good meal," he said, licking his lips.
Then he said spitefully, "Shere Khan, the Big One, has shifted his hunting grounds.
He has told me that he will hunt among these hills for the next moon."
Shere Khan was the tiger who lived near the Waingunga River, twenty miles away.
"He has no right!"
Father Wolf began angrily. "
By the Law of the Jungle he has no right to change without warning.
He will frighten every head of game within ten miles.
And I have to kill for two these days."
Mother Wolf said quietly, "He has been lame in one foot from his birth.
That is why he has only killed cattle.
Now the villagers of the Waingunga are angry with him and he has come here to make our villagers angry.
Indeed, we are very grateful to Shere Khan!"
"Shall I tell him of your gratitude?" said Tabaqui.
"Out!" snapped Father Wolf.
"Out and hunt with your master."
"I go," said Tabaqui quietly.
Below in the valley that ran down to a little river, Father Wolf heard a noise.
It was the snarly, singsong whine of a tiger who has caught nothing.
"The fool!" said Father Wolf.
"To begin a night's work with that noise!
Does he think our buck are like his fat steer?"
"It is neither steer nor buck he hunts tonight," said Mother Wolf.
"It is Man."
"Man!" said Father Wolf, showing all his white teeth.
"Are there not enough beetles and frogs that he must eat Man?"
The Law of the Jungle never orders anything without a reason.
It forbids every beast to eat Man except when he is showing his children how to kill.
Man-killing means the arrival of white men on elephants with guns and brown men with gongs, rockets, and torches.
Then everybody in the Jungle suffers.
The beasts say man-eaters become mangy and lose their teeth.
It is true.
A purr grew louder and ended in a full "Aaarh!"of the tiger's charge.
Then there was a howl, an untigerish howl, from Shere Khan.
"He has missed," said Mother Wolf.
"Something is coming uphill.
Get ready."
The bush rustled a little.
Father Wolf dropped his haunches, ready to leap.
He made his bound before he saw what it was he was jumping at.
Then he tried to stop himself.
He shot straight up into the air for four or five feet, landing almost where he left the ground.
"A man's cub!" he snapped.
Directly in front of him stood a naked brown baby, holding on to a low branch.
He looked up into Father Wolf's face and laughed.
"Bring it here," said Mother Wolf.
A wolf can mouth an egg without breaking it.
Father Wolf's jaws closed right on the child's back, yet not a tooth even scratched the skin.
He laid it down among the cubs.
"How little!
How naked and how bold!" said Mother Wolf softly.
The baby was pushing his way between the cubs to get close to the warm hide. "
Ahai!
He is taking his meal with the others."
"He is altogether without hair and I could kill him with a touch of my foot," said Father Wolf.
"But see, he looks up and is not afraid."
The moonlight was suddenly blocked out of the cave.
Shere Khan's great square head and shoulders were thrust into the entrance.
Tabaqui was squeaking behind him, "My Lord, it went in here!"
"Shere Khan does us a great honor," said Father Wolf, but his eyes were very angry.
"What does Shere Khan need?"
"A man's cub went this way," said Shere Khan.
"Give it to me."
Father Wolf knew the mouth of the cave was too narrow for a tiger to come in. "
The Wolves are a free people," he said.
"They take orders from the Head of the Pack, not from any striped cattle-killer.
The man's cub is ours - to kill if we choose."
"What talk is this of choosing?
Am I to stand nosing into your dog's den for my fair dues?
It is I, Shere Khan, who speaks!"
The tiger's roar filled the cave with thunder.
Mother Wolf sprang forward, her eyes like two green moons in the darkness.
"And it is I, Raksha the Demon, who answers.
The man's cub is mine.
Now back you go to your mother, lamer than ever you came into the world!"
Shere Khan could not stand up against Mother Wolf.
She had all the advantage of the ground and would fight to the death.
So he backed out of the cave mouth, growling.
When he was clear he shouted, "We will see what the Pack will say to this fostering of man-cubs!
To my teeth he will come in the end, thieves!"
Mother Wolf threw herself down among the cubs. "
Lie still, little frog, for Mowgli the Frog I will call you.
The time will come when you will hunt Shere Khan as he has hunted you."
Father Wolf waited till his cubs could run a little.
Then on the night of the Pack Meeting, he took them and Mowgli and Mother Wolf to the Council Rock.
Akela, the great gray Lone Wolf who led the Pack, lay out on his rock.
Below him sat forty wolves of every size and color.
The cubs tumbled over each other in the center of the circle where their mothers and fathers sat.
Akela from his rock would cry, "You know the Law.
Look well, O Wolves!"
At last Father Wolf pushed Mowgli the Frog into the center.
He sat laughing and playing with some pebbles.
Akela never raised his head from his paws, but went on, "Look well!"
A muffled roar came from behind the rocks.
The voice of Shere Khan cried, "The cub is mine!
Give him to me.
What have the Free People to do with a man's cub?"
Akela never even twitched his ears.
All he said was, "Look well, O Wolves!
What have the Free People to do with the orders of any save the Free People?"
There was a chorus of deep growls.
Now, the Law of the Jungle declares that if there is any disagreement about the acceptance of a cub, he must be spoken for by at least two members of the Pack.
The two must not be his father or his mother.
"Who speaks for this cub?" asked Akela.
There was no answer.
The only other creature who was allowed at the Pack Council was Baloo.
He was the sleepy brown bear who taught the wolf cubs the Law of the Jungle.
Baloo rose up on his hind legs and grunted.
"I speak for the man's cub.
Let him run with the Pack and I myself will teach him."
"We need yet another," said Akela.
A black shadow dropped down into the circle.
It was Bagheera the Black Panther.
Everyone knew Bagheera and no one cared to cross his path.
"O Akela and you the Free People," he purred, "I have no right in your assembly.
But the Law of the Jungle says the life of a cub may be bought at a price.
And it does not say who may or may not pay that price.
Am I right?"
"Good! Good!" said the young wolves, who are always hungry.
"Listen to Bagheera."
"To kill a naked cub is shame.
To Baloo's word I will add one bull, a fat one, newly killed."
There was an uproar of voices saying, "What harm can a naked frog do us?
Let him be accepted."
Then came Akela's deep cry, "Look well, O Wolves!"
Mowgli was still interested in the pebbles and did not notice when the wolves came and looked at him.
At last, they all went down the hill for the dead bull.
"Take him away," Akela said to Father Wolf. "
Train him as one of the Free People."
That is how Mowgli was entered into the Seeonee Wolf Pack for the price of a bull and on Baloo's good word.
Mowgli grew up with the cubs, though they were grown wolves almost before he was a child.
Father Wolf taught him his business and the meaning of things in the jungle.
Mowgli took his place at the Council Rock when the Pack met.
There he discovered if he stared hard at any wolf, the wolf would be forced to drop his eyes.
So he used to stare for fun.
He loved better than anything else to go with Bagheera into the dark, warm heart of the forest.
He would sleep all through the drowsy day and at night see how Bagheera did his killing.
Bagheera killed right and left as he felt hungry, and so did Mowgli with one exception.
"All the jungle is thine," said Bagheera.
"You can kill everything that you are strong enough to kill.
But for the sake of the bull that bought you, you must never kill or eat any cattle young or old.
That is the Law of the Jungle."
Mowgli obeyed faithfully.
One very warm day a new idea came to Bagheera, born of something he had heard.
He and Mowgli were deep in the jungle and the boy lay with his head on Bagheera's beautiful black skin.
"Little Brother, how often have I told you that Shere Khan is your enemy?"
Bagheera asked.
"As many times as there are nuts on that palm tree," said Mowgli.
"What of it?
Shere Khan is all long tail and loud talk, like Mao the Peacock."
"Open those eyes, Little Brother.
Shere Khan dare not kill you in the jungle.
But remember, Akela is very old.
Soon the day will come when he cannot kill his buck and he will be leader no more.
The young wolves believe as Shere Khan has taught them, that a man-cub has no place with the Pack."
"I was born in the jungle," said Mowgli.
"I have obeyed the Law of the Jungle.
There is no wolf of ours from whose paws I have not pulled a thorn.
Surely they are my brothers!"
"Be wise.
It is in my heart that when Akela misses his next kill, the Pack will turn against him and against you.
They will hold a jungle Council at the Rock and then -
I have it!"
said Bagheera, leaping up.
"Go down quickly to the men's huts in the valley.
Take some of the Red Flower that grows there."
By Red Flower, Bagheera meant fire.
Every beast lives in deadly fear of it.
"The Red Flower?" said Mowgli.
"That grows outside their huts in the twilight.
I will get some."
Mowgli plunged downward through the bushes to the stream at the bottom of the valley.
He ran into the croplands where the villagers lived and nestled down by the window of a hut.
Then he pressed his face close to the window and watched the fire on the hearth.
He saw the wife get up and feed it in the night with black lumps.
When the morning came, he saw the man's child pick up a pot plastered inside with earth.
The child filled it with lumps of red-hot charcoal and went out to tend the cows in the barn.
"Is that all?" said Mowgli.
He strode round the corner and met the boy.
He took the pot from his hand and disappeared into the mist.
The boy howled with fear.
Halfway up the hill, Mowgli met Bagheera with the morning dew shining like moonstones on his coat.
"Akela has missed," said the Panther.
"They would have killed him last night, but they needed you also."
"I am ready.
See!"
Mowgli held up the fire pot.
"Good!"
All that day, Mowgli sat in the cave tending his fire pot.
When Tabaqui came to the cave and told him rudely that he was wanted at the Council Rock, he laughed till Tabaqui ran away.
Mowgli went to the Council, still laughing.
Akela lay by the side of his rock as a sign that the leadership of the Pack was open.
When they were all gathered together, Shere Khan began to speak.
He would never have dared to do that when Akela was in his prime.
Mowgli sprang to his feet.
He cried, "Free People, does Shere Khan lead the Pack?
What has a tiger to do with our leadership?"
"Seeing that the leadership is yet open and being asked to speak - " Shere Khan began.
"By whom?" said Mowgli.
"Are we all jackals to fawn on this cattle butcher?"
Shere Khan roared. "
Bah!
I am weary of this.
Give me the man-cub
or I will hunt here always and not give you one bone.
He is a man and from the marrow of my bones I hate him!"
Then more than half the Pack yelled: "A man!
What has a man to do with us?
Let him go to his own place."
"And turn all the people of the villages against us?" bellowed Shere Khan.
"No, give him to me."
Akela lifted his head and said, "He is our brother in all but blood.
And you would kill him here!
Therefore, I know you to be cowards."
"He is a man, a man, a man!" snarled the Pack.
Most of the wolves began to gather around Shere Khan.
His tail was beginning to switch.
"Now the business is in your hands," said Bagheera to Mowgli.
Mowgli stood upright, the fire pot in his hands.
He was furious with rage and sorrow, for the wolves had never told him how they hated him.
"There is no need for this dog's jabber!"
Mowgli cried.
"You have told me often tonight that I am a man.
So I do not call you my brothers anymore, but dogs."
Mowgli flung the fire pot on the ground.
Some of the red coals lit a tuft of dried moss that flared up.
All the Council drew back in terror before the leaping flames.
Mowgli thrust a dead branch into the fire till it lit and crackled.
"Save Akela from death," said Bagheera in a low tone.
"He was ever your friend."
Mowgli stared around slowly.
"The jungle is shut to me.
But I will be more merciful than you are.
I promise I will not betray you to men as you have betrayed me."
He kicked the fire with his foot and the sparks flew up. "
But there is a debt to pay before I go."
He strode forward to where Shere Khan sat blinking at the flames.
Mowgli caught him by the tuft on his chin.
"Up, dog!" Mowgli cried. "
Up or I will set that coat ablaze!"
Shere Khan's ears lay flat back on his head.
He shut his eyes, for the blazing branch was very near.
"This is how we beat dogs when we are men. "
He beat Shere Khan over the head with the branch.
The tiger whimpered and whined in an agony of fear.
"Pah!
Go now!
But remember when I next come to the Council Rock, it will be with Shere Khan's hide on my head.
Akela goes free to live as he pleases.
You will not kill him because it is not my will.
Go!"
Mowgli struck right and left round the circle.
The wolves ran howling with the sparks burning their fur.
At last there were only Akela, Bagheera, and perhaps ten wolves that had taken Mowgli's side.
He caught his breath and sobbed.
"I will go to man," he said, "but I must say farewell to my mother."
He went to the cave and cried on her coat.
The four cubs howled miserably.
"You will not forget me?" said Mowgli.
"Never while we can follow a trail," said the cubs.
"Come to the foot of the hill when you are a man and we will talk to you."
"Come soon!" said Father Wolf.
"Oh, wise little frog, come again soon.
For we be old, your mother and I."
"I will surely come," said Mowgli.
"When I come it will be to lay out Shere Khan's hide upon the Council Rock.
Tell them in the jungle never to forget me!"
The dawn was beginning to break when Mowgli went down the hillside alone, to meet those mysterious things called men.
His spots are the joy of the Leopard;
his horns are the Buffalo's pride.
Be clean, for the strength of the hunter
is known by the gloss of his hide.
If you find that the young Bull can toss you,
or the heavy-browed Deer can gore;
You need not stop work to inform us;
we knew it ten seasons before.
Burden not the cubs of the stranger,
but hail them as Sister and Brother,
For though they are little and chubby,
it may be the Bear is their mother.
"There is none like to me!" says the Cub
in the pride of his earliest kill;
But the jungle is large and the Cub he is small.
Let him think and be still.
- Proverbs of Baloo
All that is told here happened some time before Mowgli was turned out of the Seeonee Wolf Pack.
It was in the days when Baloo was teaching him the Law of the Jungle.
The big, serious, old brown bear was delighted to have so quick a pupil.
So, Baloo taught him the Wood and Water Laws.
Then Mowgli was taught the Stranger's Hunting Call.
Mowgli had to learn much by heart.
He grew very tired of saying the same thing over a hundred times.
One day when Mowgli had run off in a temper, Bagheera spoke to Baloo.
"Think how small he is," Bagheera said.
"How can his little head carry all your long talk?"
The Black Panther would have spoiled Mowgli if he'd had his own way.
"Is there anything in the jungle too little to be killed?
No.
That is why I teach him these things," Baloo answered earnestly.
"I am now teaching him the Master Words of the Jungle.
That will protect him with the birds and the Snake People, and all that hunt on four feet, except his own pack."
"What are those Master Words?
I am more likely to give help than to ask it."
Bagheera stretched out one paw and admired the steel blue talons at the end of it. "
Still I should like to know."
"I will call Mowgli.
Come, Little Brother!"
"My head is ringing like a bee tree," said a sullen little voice.
Mowgli slid down a tree trunk.
"I come for Bagheera and not for you, fat old Baloo."
"Tell Bagheera the Master Words of the Jungle I have taught you this day," Baloo said.
But he was hurt by Mowgli's words.
"Master Words for which people?" asked Mowgli, delighted to show off.
"I know them all!"
Mowgli said the word for the Hunting People, the birds, and the Snake People.
Then he jumped onto Bagheera's back and made the worst faces he could think of at Baloo.
Baloo turned aside to tell Bagheera how he had begged the Master Words from Hathi the Wild Elephant.
As the Bear and Panther talked, Mowgli was trying to make himself heard.
He pulled at Bagheera's fur and kicked hard.
Finally, he shouted at the top of his voice, "I shall have a tribe of my own and lead them through the branches all day long."
"What is this new folly?" said Bagheera.
"And throw branches and dirt at old Baloo," Mowgli went on. "
They have promised me this.
Ah!"
Baloo's big paw scooped Mowgli off Bagheera's back.
As the boy lay between the big forepaws, he could see the Bear was angry.
"Mowgli," said Baloo, "you have been talking with the Bandar-log - the Monkey People."
"Why have I never been taken among the Monkey People?
They stand on their feet as I do."
"Listen, man-cub," said the Bear.
His voice rumbled like thunder on a hot night.
"I have taught you the Law of the Jungle for all the peoples of the jungle except for the Monkey Folk who live in the trees.
They have no Law.
They have no remembrance."
He had hardly spoken when a shower of nuts and twigs spattered down through the tree branches. "
The Monkey People are forbidden to the Jungle People.
Remember," said Baloo.
The Monkey People in the trees watched Mowgli.
They considered his play most wonderful.
They followed Baloo, Bagheera, and Mowgli through the jungle very quietly till it was time for the midday nap.
Mowgli slept between the Panther and the Bear, resolving to have no more to do with the Monkey People.
The next thing he remembered was feeling hands on his legs and arms.
Two of the strongest monkeys caught Mowgli under the arms and swung off with him through the trees.
Bounding and crashing and whooping and yelling, the whole tribe of Bandar-log swept along the tree-roads with Mowgli as their prisoner.
For a time, Mowgli was afraid.
Then he grew angry.
Then he began to think.
He stared upward and saw Chil the Kite wheeling as he kept watch over the jungle.
Chil saw that the monkeys were carrying something and dropped lower to find out if their load was good to eat.
He whistled in surprise when he saw Mowgli being dragged along.
He heard Mowgli give the Kite call for "Mark my trail!"
Mowgli shouted, "Tell Baloo of the Seeonee Pack and Bagheera of the Council Rock."
"In whose name, Brother?"
Chil had never seen Mowgli before.
"Mowgli the Frog.
Man-cub
they call me.
Mark my tra-il!"
The last words were shrieked as he was being swung through the air.
Chil nodded and rose up till he looked no bigger than a speck.
There he hung, watching the swaying treetops with his telescope eyes.
Baloo clasped his paws over his ears and rolled to and fro moaning.
"Baloo, you have neither memory nor respect," said Bagheera impatiently.
"What would the jungle think if I, the Black Panther, curled myself up like Sahi the Porcupine and howled?"
"Oh, fat, root-digging fool that I am," said Baloo, uncoiling himself with a jerk.
"It is true what Hathi the Wild Elephant says. ‘
To each his own fear. '
The Bandar-log fear Kaa the Rock Python.
Let us go to Kaa."
"What will he do for us?
He is not of our tribe, being footless and with most evil eyes," said Bagheera.
"He is very old and very cunning.
Above all, he is always hungry," said Baloo hopefully.
They went off to look for Kaa the Rock Python.
They found him stretched out on a warm ledge in the afternoon sun, admiring his beautiful new skin.
He licked his lips as he thought of his dinner to come.
Kaa was not a poison snake, but his strength lay in his hug.
When he had once lapped his huge coils round anybody there was no more to be said.
"Good hunting!" cried Baloo, sitting up on his haunches.
"Good hunting for us all," Kaa answered.
"Is there any news of game afoot?
A doe or even a young buck?
I am as empty as a dried well."
"We are hunting," said Baloo carelessly.
He knew that you must not hurry Kaa.
He was too big.
"Give me permission to come with you," said Kaa.
"I came very near to falling from a branch on my last hunt.
The noise of my slipping woke the Bandar-log and they called me the most evil names."
Now, a snake very seldom shows that he is angry.
But Baloo and Bagheera could see the big muscles on either side of Kaa's throat ripple and bulge.
"It is the Bandar-log that we follow now," said Baloo.
"Kaa, those nut-stealers have stolen away our man-cub.
You may have heard of him," said the Black Panther.
"We know that of all the Jungle People they fear Kaa alone."
"They have good reason," said Kaa.
"Now, where did they go with the cub?"
"The jungle alone knows," said Baloo.
"Hillo!
Up!
Up!
Look up, Baloo of the Seeonee Wolf Pack!"
Baloo looked up and there was Chil the Kite, sweeping down with the sun shining on his wings.
"What is it?"
"I have seen Mowgli among the Bandar-log.
They have taken him to the monkey city, to the Cold Lairs.
I have told the bats to watch through the dark time.
Good hunting, all you below!"
"A deep sleep to you, Chil," cried Bagheera.
"I will remember you in my next kill and put aside the head for you alone, O best of Kites!"
"The boy held the Master Word.
I could have done no less."
Chil circled up to his roost.
"Now we must go to the Cold Lairs," said Bagheera.
They all knew where that place was, but few of the Jungle People ever went there.
It was an old deserted city, buried in the jungle.
Beasts seldom use a place that men have once used.
"It is half a night's journey at full speed," said Bagheera.
"Kaa and I dare not wait for you.
Follow, Baloo."
In the Cold Lairs, the Monkey People were not thinking of Mowgli's friends at all.
The monkeys dragged Mowgli into the Cold Lairs late in the afternoon.
Instead of going to sleep as Mowgli would have done after a long journey, they joined hands and danced about.
They sang their foolish songs.
"I wish to eat," said Mowgli.
"Bring me food or give me leave to hunt here."
Twenty or thirty monkeys bounded away to bring him roots and wild pawpaws.
But they fell to fighting on the road.
It was too much trouble to go back with what was left of the fruit.
Mowgli was sore and angry, as well as hungry.
He felt he had reached a very bad place, indeed.
All Baloo has said about the Bandar-log is true, he thought.
I must try to return to my own jungle.
No sooner had he walked to the city wall than the monkeys pulled him back.
They told him he did not know how happy he was and pinched him to make him grateful.
The monkeys gathered by hundreds and hundreds on the terrace to listen to their own speakers singing the praises of the Bandar-log.
Mowgli's head spun with the noise.
Bagheera and Kaa watched from the ruined ditch below the city.
"I will go to the west wall," Kaa whispered.
"When that cloud covers the moon, I shall go to the terrace.
They hold some kind of council there over the boy," Bagheera said.
"Good hunting," said Kaa grimly.
He glided away to the west wall.
The cloud hid the moon and Mowgli heard Bagheera's light feet on the terrace.
The Black Panther had raced up without a sound and was striking right and left among the monkeys.
They were seated around Mowgli in circles of sixty deep.
Five or six monkeys laid hold of Mowgli, dragged him up the wall of the summerhouse, and pushed him through the hole of the broken dome.
The fall was a good fifteen feet.
But Mowgli fell as Baloo had taught him and landed on his feet.
"Stay there till we have killed your friends.
Later we will play with you, if the Poison People leave you alive," shouted the monkeys.
"We be of one blood, you and I," said Mowgli, quickly giving the Snake's Call.
He could hear them rustling all round him.
"Even sssso!
Down hoods all!" said a half a dozen low voices.
The old summerhouse was alive with cobras. "
Stand still, Little Brother, for your feet may do us harm."
Mowgli stood listening to the furious sounds of the fight around Bagheera.
For the first time since he was born, Bagheera was fighting for his life.
Mowgli called aloud, "To the tank, Bagheera.
Roll to the water tank!"
Bagheera worked his way desperately, inch by inch, straight for the tanks.
From the ruined wall nearest the jungle rose up the rumbling war shout of Baloo.
Spreading out his forepaws, Bagheera hugged as many as he could hold.
Then he began to hit with a bat-bat-bat, like the flipping strokes of a paddle wheel.
A crash and a splash told Mowgli that Bagheera had fought his way to the tank where the monkeys could not follow.
Kaa had only just worked his way over the west wall.
He came straight and anxious to kill.
His first stroke was delivered into the heart of the crowd round Baloo.
There was no need for a second.
The monkeys scattered with cries of "Kaa!
It is Kaa!
Run!
Run!"
Generations of monkeys had been scared into good behavior by the stories their elders told them of Kaa.
Kaa the Night Thief could slip along the branches as quietly as moss grows and steal away the strongest monkey.
Mowgli put his eye to the screen of the summerhouse and hooted owl-like to show his contempt.
"Get the man-cub out of that trap.
I can do no more," Bagheera gasped.
"They may attack again."
"They will not move till I order them," Kaa hissed and the city was silent once more.
"Where is the Manling?"
Kaa asked.
"Here, in a trap.
I cannot climb out," cried Mowgli.
"Take him away.
He dances like Mao the Peacock.
He will crush our young," said the cobras inside.
"Hah!" said Kaa with a chuckle. "
Stand back, Manling.
Hide, O Poison People.
I break down the wall."
Lifting six feet of his body off the ground, Kaa sent home half a dozen smashing blows with his nose.
The screen broke and fell away in a cloud of dust.
Mowgli leaped through the opening and flung himself between Baloo and Bagheera. "
Oh, my Brothers!
You bleed."
"It is nothing, if you are safe," whimpered Baloo.
Bagheera said, "Here is Kaa to whom we owe the battle and you owe your life."
Mowgli turned and saw the great Python's head swaying a foot above his own.
"I take my life from you tonight.
My kill shall be your kill, if ever you are hungry, O Kaa."
"All thanks, Little Brother," said Kaa. "
But now go quickly with your friends.
Go and sleep, for the moon sets."
"Jump on my back, Little Brother," said Bagheera.
"We will go home."
Mowgli laid his head down on Bagheera's back.
He slept so deeply he never woke up when he was put down by Mother Wolf's side in the home cave.
What of the hunting, hunter bold?
Brother, the watch was long and cold.
What of the game you went to kill?
Brother, he crops in the jungle still.
Where is the power that made your pride?
Brother, it drops from my flank and side.
Where is the haste that you hurry by?
Brother, I go to my lair - to die.
Now we must go back to the first tale.
When Mowgli left the wolf's cave after the fight with the Pack, he kept to the rough road that ran down the valley.
He followed it at a steady trot for nearly twenty miles to a country he did not know.
He came to a village gate and sat down.
When a man came out, he stood up, opened his mouth, and pointed down it to show he wanted food.
The man ran up the street, shouting for the priest.
The priest was a fat man dressed in white with a red and yellow mark on his forehead.
He came to the gate and at least a hundred people came with him.
They stared and talked and shouted and pointed at Mowgli.
"They have no manners, these Men Folk," said Mowgli to himself.
"He is but a wolf-child run away from the jungle," said the priest.
Some women said together, "He is a handsome boy.
By my honor, Messua, he is not unlike your boy who was taken by the tiger."
The priest was a clever man.
He knew Messua was wife to the richest villager in the place.
He looked up at the sky for a minute.
He said solemnly, "What the jungle has taken, the jungle has restored.
Take the boy into your house, my sister.
And forget not to honor the priest who sees far into the lives of men."
The crowd parted as the woman took Mowgli to her hut.
She gave him a long drink of milk and some bread.
Then she looked into his eyes.
"You are very like my Nathoo, and you shall be my son," she said.
I am as silly and dumb as a man could be with us in the jungle, Mowgli thought.
I must speak their talk.
So as soon as Messua pronounced a word, Mowgli would imitate it.
Before dark he had learned the names of many things in the hut.
At bedtime, Mowgli would not sleep under anything that looked so much like a panther trap as the hut.
"Give him his way," said Messua's husband.
"Remember, till now he has never slept on a bed."
So Mowgli stretched himself in some long, clean grass at the edge of the field.
But before he had closed his eyes, a gray nose poked him under the chin.
"Wake, Little Brother.
I bring news," said Gray Brother, the oldest of Mother Wolf's cubs.
"Are all well in the jungle?" asked Mowgli, hugging him.
"All except the wolves that were burned with the Red Flower.
Listen, Shere Khan is badly burned.
He swears he will lay your bones in the Waingunga."
"I also have made a little promise.
But I am tired tonight with new things."
"You will not forget that you are a wolf?" said Gray Brother anxiously.
"Never.
But also I will always remember that I have been cast out of the Pack."
"Little Brother, when I come down again, I will wait in the bamboos at the edge of the grazing grounds."
For the next three months, Mowgli hardly ever left the village.
He was so busy learning the ways and customs of men.
Then the village headman told Mowgli he would have to go out with the buffalo the next day and herd them while they grazed.
No one was more pleased than Mowgli.
At night, he went off to a circle that met every evening under a great fig tree.
The headman, the watchman, the barber, and old Buldeo, the village hunter, met and smoked.
They told wonderful tales of gods and men and ghosts.
Buldeo told even more wonderful ones of the ways of the beasts in the jungle.
Mowgli had to cover his face to not show that he was laughing.
Buldeo was explaining how the tiger that had carried away Messua's son was a ghost-tiger.
His body was occupied by the ghost of a wicked old moneylender who had died some years ago.
"I know this is true because Purun Dass always limped from a blow he got in a riot.
The tiger I speak of, he limps, too."
"Are all of these tales such cobwebs and moon talk?" said Mowgli.
"That tiger limps because he was born lame, as everyone knows.
To talk of the soul of a moneylender in a beast that never had the courage of a jackal is child's talk."
"It is the jungle brat, is it?" said Buldeo.
"If you are so wise, better bring his hide to Khanhiwara.
The government has set 100 rupees on his life."
Mowgli went through the village street at dawn, sitting on the back of the great herd bull, Rama.
The slate blue buffalo, with their long horns and savage eyes, rose out of their sheds and followed him.
Mowgli drove them on to the edge of the plain where the Waingunga River came out of the jungle.
Then he dropped from Rama's neck, trotted off to a bamboo clump, and found Gray Brother.
"What news of Shere Khan?" asked Mowgli.
"He has gone off again, for the game is scarce.
But he means to kill you."
"While he is away, you or one of the four brothers sit on that rock so I can see you.
When he comes back, wait for me in the ravine by the dhak tree in the center of the plain."
Then Mowgli picked out a shady place and lay down to sleep.
The buffalo grazed around him.
They got down into the muddy pools and worked their way in till only their noses and eyes showed above the surface.
Then evening came and the children called and the buffalo lumbered up out of the sticky mud.
They all strung across the plain back to the twinkling village lights.
Day after day Mowgli would lead the buffalo out to the mud.
Day after day he would see Gray Brother's back a mile and a half across the plain.
At last a day came when he did not see Gray Brother at the signal place.
He laughed and headed the buffalo for the ravine by the dhak tree, which was covered with golden red flowers.
There sat Gray Brother, every hair on his back lifted.
"Shere Khan's plan is to wait for you at the village gate this evening.
He is lying up now in the dry ravine of the Waingunga," Gray Brother said, licking his lips a little.
Mowgli stood with his finger in his mouth, thinking.
"I can take the herd round through the jungle to the head of the ravine and then sweep down.
But he would slink out at the foot.
We must block that end.
Gray Brother, can you cut the herd in two for me?"
"Not I, perhaps.
But I have brought a wise helper."
Gray Brother trotted off and dropped into a hole.
There, a huge gray head lifted up that Mowgli knew well.
"Akela! Akela!" said Mowgli, clapping his hands.
"Cut the herd in two, Akela."
The two wolves ran in and out of the herd.
The buffalo snorted, threw up their heads, and separated into two clumps.
Mowgli slipped onto Rama's back.
"Drive the bulls away to the left, Akela," Mowgli said.
"Gray Brother, when we are gone, hold the cows together.
Drive them into the foot of the ravine."
Mowgli's plan was simple enough.
All he wanted to do was to make a big circle uphill and get at the head of the ravine.
Then take the bulls down it and catch Shere Khan between the bulls and the cows.
Mowgli held up his hand.
"I must tell Shere Khan who comes.
We have him in the trap."
He put his hands to his mouth and shouted down the ravine.
After a long time there came back a sleepy snarl of a full-fed tiger just awakened.
"Who calls?" said Shere Khan.
"I, Mowgli.
Cattle thief, it is time to come to the Council Rock!
Hurry them down, Akela!
Down, Rama, down!"
The herd paused for an instant at the edge of the slope.
They pitched over one after the other.
Once started, there was no chance of stopping.
Shere Khan heard the thunder of their hoofs.
He picked himself up and lumbered down the ravine, looking for some way of escape.
The charge carried both herds into the plain, goring and stamping and snorting.
"Quick, Akela!
Drive them away.
It is all over," yelled Mowgli.
Akela and Gray Brother ran to and fro, nipping the legs of the buffalo.
The herd wheeled once to charge up the ravine but Mowgli managed to turn Rama.
The others followed him to the mud.
Shere Khan needed no more trampling.
He was dead.
The kites were coming for him already.
A boy trained among men would never have dreamed of skinning a ten-foot tiger.
But Mowgli knew how a skin could be taken off.
It was hard work.
Mowgli slashed and grunted for an hour.
Presently, a hand fell on his shoulders.
"What is this folly?" said Buldeo angrily.
"To think that you can skin a tiger!
Well, perhaps I will give you one of the rupees of the reward when I have taken the skin to Khanhiwara."
"I need the skin for my own use, old man," said Mowgli.
"What talk is this to the chief hunter of the village?
Leave the carcass!"
"Here, Akela, this man plagues me," Mowgli said.
Buldeo quickly found himself sprawling on the grass with a gray wolf standing over him.
"There is an old war between this lame tiger and me.
And I have won," Mowgli declared.
It is magic of the worst kind, thought Buldeo.
"I am an old man," Buldeo said to Mowgli.
"I did not know you were anything more than a herd boy.
May I rise up and go away?"
"Go, and peace go with you.
Let him go, Akela," Mowgli commanded.
Mowgli went on with his work, but it was nearly twilight before he and the wolves had drawn the great bright skin clear off the body.
"Now we must hide this and take the buffalo home!
Help me herd them, Akela."
Half the village seemed to be waiting for him by the gate.
A shower of stones whistled about his ears.
The villagers shouted, "Wolf's brat!
Jungle demon!
Go away!"
"Wolf!
Wolf's cub!
Go away!"
shouted the priest, waving a sprig of the sacred tulsi plant.
"Again?
Last time it was because I was a man.
This time it is because I am a wolf.
Let us go, Akela," Mowgli said.
Messua ran across to the herd and cried, "Oh, my son!
They say you are a sorcerer, but I do not believe it.
But go away or they will kill you.
Buldeo says you are a wizard, but I know you have avenged Nathoo's death."
"Come back, Messua!" shouted the crowd. "
Or we will stone you."
"Fare you well, children of men.
And thank Messua that I do not come in with my wolves and hunt you up and down your street!"
yelled Mowgli.
The moon was just going down when Mowgli and the two wolves came to the hill of the Council Rock.
They stopped at Mother Wolf's cave.
"They have cast me out from the Man Pack, Mother," announced Mowgli.
"But I come with the hide of Shere Khan to keep my word."
Mother Wolf walked stiffly from the cave with the cubs behind her.
Her eyes glowed as she saw the skin.
"I told him when he crammed his head into this cave that the hunter would be the hunted.
It is well done."
"Man Pack and Wolf Pack have cast me out," said Mowgli.
"Now I will hunt alone in the jungle."
"We will hunt with you," said the four cubs.
So Mowgli went away and hunted with the four cubs in the jungle from that day on.
He was not always alone.
Years afterward, he became a man and married.
But that is a story for grown-ups.
Oh! hush thee, my baby, the night is behind us,
And black are the waters that sparkled so green.
The moon o'er the long waves looks downward to find us
At rest in the hollows that rustle between.
Where billow meets billow, then soft be your pillow;
Ah, weary wee flipperling, curl at your ease!
The storm shall not wake you, nor shark overtake you,
Asleep in the arms of the slow-swinging seas!
- Seal Lullaby
Nobody comes to the North-East Point on the Island of St.
Paul in the Bering Sea except on business.
The only people who have regular business there are the seals.
They come in the summer months by hundreds of thousands out of the cold, gray sea.
North-East Point Beach has the finest shelter for seals of any place in all the world.
Sea Catch knew that.
Every spring he would swim like a torpedo boat straight for North-East Point.
He would spend a month fighting with his companions for a good place on the rocks, close to the sea.
Sea Catch was fifteen years old, a huge gray fur seal with long, wicked teeth.
He was scarred all over with the marks of savage fights.
But he was always ready for just one fight more.
He only wanted room by the sea for his nursery.
There were 50,000 other seals hunting for the same thing each spring.
The whistling, bellowing, roaring, and blowing on the beach was something frightful.
Their wives never came to the island until late in May or early in June.
They did not care to be torn to pieces.
Sea Catch had just finished his forty-fifth fight one spring when his sleek, gentle-eyed wife, Matkah, came up out of the sea.
He caught her by the back of the neck and dumped her down on his place.
"Late as usual," he said gruffly.
"Where have you been?"
Sea Catch did not eat anything during the four months he stayed on the beaches.
So his temper was generally bad.
Matkah looked round and cooed, "How thoughtful of you!
You've taken the old place again."
Sea Catch sunk his head proudly between his fat shoulders and pretended to go to sleep.
All the seals and their wives were on the land.
You could hear their racket miles out to sea above the loudest gales.
There were over a million seals on the beach.
Matkah's baby was born in the middle of that confusion.
There was something about his coat that made his mother look at him very closely.
"Sea Catch, our baby's going to be white!" she said.
"Empty clamshells and dry seaweed!" snorted Sea Catch. "
There never has been such a thing in the world as a white seal."
"There's going to be now," said Matkah.
They called the little one Kotick.
The first thing the little fellow did was crawl inland.
There he met tens of thousands of babies his own age.
They played together like puppies and went to sleep on the clean sand.
Little seals can no more swim than little children, but they are unhappy till they learn.
Kotick took two weeks learning to use his flippers.
At last, he found that he truly belonged to the water.
Now and then, Kotick would see a thin fin, like a big shark's fin.
He knew that was the Killer Whale, the Grampus, who eats young seals.
The little seal would head for the beach like an arrow.
Late in October, the seals began to leave St.
Paul for the deep sea. "
Next year you will be a holluschickie, a young bachelor," said Matkah to Kotick.
"But this year you must learn how to catch fish."
They set off together across the Pacific Ocean.
Matkah showed Kotick how to sleep on his back with his flippers tucked down by his side and his nose just out of the water.
When Kotick felt his skin tingle all over, Matkah told him he was learning the "feel of the water. "
That tingly, prickly feeling meant bad weather was coming.
He must swim hard and get away.
At the end of six months what Kotick did not know about deep-sea fishing was not worth knowing.
All that time he never set a flipper on dry land.
One day he felt faint and lazy all over.
He remembered the good firm beaches of North-East Point 7,000 miles away.
That minute he turned north, swimming steadily.
Kotick met scores of his friends, all bound for the same place.
They said, "Greeting, Kotick!
This year we can dance the Fire Dance and play on the new grass.
Where did you get that coat?"
Kotick's fur was almost pure white now.
He felt very proud of it but he only said, "Swim quickly!
My bones are aching for the land.
" They all came to the beach where they had been born.
They heard the old seals, their fathers, fighting in the rolling mist.
That night Kotick danced the Fire Dance with the yearling seals.
The sea is full of fire on summer nights.
Each seal leaves a trail like burning oil behind him and a flaming flash when he jumps.
Then they went inland to the holluschickie grounds and rolled up and down in the new wild wheat.
They told stories of what they had done while they had been at sea.
A couple of black-haired men with flat faces came from behind a sand dune.
Kotick, who had never seen a man before, coughed and lowered his head.
The men were Kerick Booterin, the chief of the seal hunters on the island, and Patalamon, his son.
"Ho!" said Patalamon. "
Look!
There's a white seal!"
Kerick Booterin turned nearly white.
He began to utter a prayer. "
Don't touch him, Patalamon.
Perhaps it is old Zaharrof's ghost.
He was lost last year in the big gale."
"I'm not going near him," said Patalamon.
"He's unlucky."
"The men ought to skin 200 today.
But it's the beginning of the season
and they are new to the work.
A hundred will do.
Quick!"
Patalamon rattled two seal shoulder bones in front of a herd of holluschickie.
Then he stepped near and the seals began to move.
Hundreds of thousands of seals watched them being driven, but they went on playing.
"I am going to follow," Kotick said.
The distance to the killing grounds was only half a mile, but it took an hour to cover.
Then ten or twelve men with iron clubs four feet long came up.
Kerick said, "Let go!"
And the men clubbed the seals on the head as fast as they could.
That was enough for Kotick.
He turned and galloped back to the sea.
His little new mustache stood out with horror.
He flung himself flipper-overhead into the clear water where the great sea lions sit on the edge of the surf.
He rocked there, gasping miserably.
"What's here?" asked a Sea Lion gruffly.
"I'm very lonesome!" said Kotick.
"They're killing all the holluschickie on all the beaches."
"You must have seen old Kerick killing off a drove.
He's done that for thirty years."
"It's horrible," said Kotick.
"If you seals will come here year after year, of course the men will know of it.
Unless you can find an island where no men ever come, you will always be driven."
"Is there any such island?"
"Go to Walrus Island and talk to Sea Vitch.
He may know something," answered the Sea Lion.
Kotick thought that was good advice.
He headed for Walrus Island, where the walrus herded by themselves.
He landed close to old Sea Vitch, who has no manners unless he is asleep.
"Wake up!" barked Kotick.
When the ugly walrus did, Kotick called out.
"Is there any place for seals to go where men don't ever come?"
"Go and ask Sea Cow," said Sea Vitch.
"If he is living still, he'll be able to tell you."
Kotick swam back to North-East Point.
There he found that no one sympathized with him in his attempts to discover a quiet place for the seals.
"What you must do is grow up and be a big seal like your father, and have a nursery on the beach," said Sea Catch.
"Then they will leave you alone.
In another five years you ought to be able to fight for yourself."
Even gentle Matkah said, "You will never be able to stop the killing.
Go and play in the sea, Kotick."
Kotick went off and danced the Fire Dance with a very heavy little heart.
That autumn he left the beach as soon as he could.
He set off alone to find the Sea Cow.
He was going to find a quiet island with good firm beaches for seals, where men could not get at them.
Kotick spent five seasons exploring with a four months' rest each year at North-East Point.
But everywhere he went the People of the Sea told him the same things.
Seals had come to those islands once upon a time, but men had killed them all off.
That nearly broke his heart.
On his way north, Kotick hauled out on an island full of green trees.
He found an old seal who was dying.
Kotick caught fish for him and told him all his sorrows.
"I am going back to North-East Point.
If I am driven to the killing pens with the holluschickie I shall not care," said Kotick.
The old seal said, "Try once more.
I am the last of the Lost Colony of Masafuera.
In the days when men killed us by the hundred thousand there was a story on the beaches.
It said that some day a white seal would come out of the North and lead the seal people to a quiet place."
This cheered Kotick immensely.
When he came back to North-East Point, his mother begged him to marry and settle down.
"Give me another season," Kotick said.
Curiously enough, there was another seal who thought she would put off marrying till the next year.
Kotick danced the Fire Dance with her the night before he set off on his last exploration.
This time Kotick went west because he had found the trail of a school of halibut.
He chased them till he was tired.
Then he curled himself up and went to sleep near Copper Island.
About midnight he felt himself gently bumped on a weed bed.
Then he jumped like a cat, for he saw huge things nosing about in the water.
"Who in the Deep Sea are these people?"
he said.
They were like no walrus, sea lion, seal, bear, whale, shark, fish, or squid Kotick had ever seen.
They were between twenty and thirty feet long and they had no hind flippers.
Instead they had a shovel-like tail.
Their heads were the most foolish looking things you ever saw.
Glassy eyes stared but they did not speak.
"Well!" said Kotick.
"You're the only people I've ever met uglier than Sea Vitch."
He knew he had found the Sea Cow at last!
The Sea Cow began to travel northward very slowly, stopping from time to time.
Kotick followed them.
It was weary work for Kotick.
He could not hurry them on.
One night they sank like stones through the shiny water and began to swim quickly.
They headed for a cliff by the shore that ran down into deep water.
They plunged into a dark hole at the foot of it, under the sea.
It was a long, long swim.
"My wig!"
Kotick said.
He rose, gasping and puffing, into open water at the farther end.
"It was a long dive but it was worth it."
The Sea Cows were browsing lazily along the edges of the finest beaches Kotick had ever seen.
Best of all, Kotick knew by the feel of the water that no men had ever come there.
"It's North-East Point but ten times better," he said.
"The Sea Cow must be wiser than I thought.
If any place in the sea is safe, this is it."
Then he dived and raced through southward.
When he looked back at the cliffs, Kotick could hardly believe he had been under them.
When he hauled out just above Sea Lion's Neck, the first person he met was the seal who had been waiting for him.
She saw by the look in his eyes that he had found his island at last.
The holluschickie and Sea Catch and all the other seals laughed when he told them what he had discovered.
A young seal about his own age said, "Remember, we've been fighting for our nurseries, and that's a thing you never did."
"Will you come with me if I fight and win?" said Kotick.
A green light came into his eye.
He was angry at having to fight at all.
"If you win, I will come," said the young seal carelessly.
He had no time to change his mind.
Kotick sank his teeth in the blubber of the young seal's neck.
Then he threw himself back on his haunches and hauled his enemy down the beach, shook him, and knocked him over.
You see, Kotick had never fasted four months as the big seals did every year.
And his deep-sea swimming trips kept him in perfect condition.
His curly white mane stood up with rage and his eyes flamed.
He was splendid to look at.
Old Sea Catch saw Kotick tearing past, hauling the grizzled old seals like they were halibut.
He knocked over the young bachelors in all directions.
Sea Catch gave a roar and shouted, "He may be a fool, but he's the best fighter on the beaches!
Don't tackle your father, my son!
He's with you!"
"Who comes with me to the Sea Cow's tunnel?"roared Kotick.
"We will come," said thousands of tired voices.
"We will follow Kotick, the White Seal."
A week later he and nearly 10,000 holluschickie went north to the Sea Cow's tunnel.
The seals that stayed at North-East Point called them idiots.
But year after year more seals went away from NorthEast Point to the sheltered beaches.
Kotick sits there all the summer through, getting bigger and stronger each year.
The holluschickie play around him, in that sea where no man comes.
At the hole where he went in
Red-Eye called to Wrinkle-Skin.
Hear what little Red-Eye sayeth:
"Nag, come up and dance with death!"
Eye to eye and head to head,
(Keep the measure, Nag. )
This shall end when one is dead;
(At your pleasure, Nag. )
Turn for turn and twist for twist -
(Run and hide you, Nag. )
Hah!
The hooded Death has missed!
(Woe be to you, Nag!)
This is the story of the great war Rikki-tikki-tavi fought single-handed.
He was a mongoose.
His eyes and the end of his restless nose were pink.
He could fluff up his tail till it looked like a bottle brush.
His war cry was "Rikk-tikk-tikki-tikki-tchk!"
One day a high summer flood washed Rikkitikki-tavi out of the burrow where he lived with his father and mother.
It carried him down a roadside ditch.
He found a little clump of grass and clung to it till he lost his senses.
When he recovered, he was lying in the middle of a garden path.
A small boy was saying, "Here's a dead mongoose.
Let's have a funeral."
"No," said his mother, "let's bring him in and dry him.
Perhaps he isn't really dead."
They wrapped him in cotton and warmed him over a little fire.
He opened his eyes and sneezed.
"Now, don't frighten him," said a big man.
He was an Englishman who had just moved into the cottage. "
We'll see what he'll do."
Rikki-tikki ran all round the table, put his fur in order, and scratched himself.
He jumped on the small boy's shoulder.
"Don't be frightened, Teddy," said his father.
"That's his way of making friends.
Let's give him something to eat."
They gave him a little piece of raw meat.
Rikkitikki liked it immensely.
He spent all that day roaming the house.
When Teddy went to bed, Rikkitikki climbed up, too.
Teddy's mother and father came in to look at their boy.
Rikki-tikki was awake on the pillow.
"I don't like that," said Teddy's mother.
"
He may bite the child."
"Teddy's safer with that little beast than if he had a bloodhound to watch him.
If a snake came into the nursery now - "
But Teddy's mother wouldn't think of anything so awful.
Early in the morning Rikki-tikki came to breakfast in the veranda riding on Teddy's shoulder.
Then he went out into the garden.
He scuttled up and down, snuffing here and there.
He heard very sorrowful voices in a thornbush.
It was Darzee the Tailorbird and his wife.
The nest swayed to and fro, as they sat on the rim and cried.
"What is the matter?" asked Rikki-tikki.
"One of our babies fell out of the nest yesterday and Nag ate him," said Darzee.
"Who is Nag?"
Darzee and his wife shrunk down in the nest.
At the foot of the bush there came a low hiss, a horrid cold sound.
Rikki-tikki jumped back two clear feet.
Inch by inch out of the grass rose up the head and spread hood of Nag the Black Cobra.
He was five feet long from tongue to tail.
"Who is Nag?" said he.
"I am Nag.
Look and be afraid!"
He spread out his hood more than ever.
Rikkitikki was afraid for a minute.
But it is impossible for a mongoose to stay frightened for any length of time.
Rikki-tikki knew that a grown mongoose's business in life was to fight and eat snakes.
Nag knew that too and at the bottom of his cold heart he was afraid.
"Behind you!
Look behind you!"
sang Darzee.
Rikki-tikki jumped up in the air as high as he could go.
Just under him whizzed the head of Nagaina, Nag's wicked wife.
Rikki-tikki sat back on his tail and hind legs like a little kangaroo and looked all around him.
He chattered with rage.
But Nag and Nagaina had disappeared into the grass.
When Teddy came running down the path, Rikkitikki was ready to be petted.
But just as Teddy was stooping, something wriggled a little in the dust.
A tiny voice said, "Be careful.
I am Death!"
It was Karait, the brown snakeling.
His bite is as dangerous as a cobra's.
But he is so small that nobody thinks of him.
So he does more harm to people.
Rikki-tikki's eyes were all red and he rocked back and forth.
He looked for a good place to hold.
Karait struck out.
Rikki-tikki jumped sideways and tried to run in.
But the little head lashed within a fraction of his shoulder.
He had to jump over the body.
Teddy shouted to the house, "Our mongoose is killing a snake!"
Rikki-tikki heard a scream from Teddy's mother.
His father ran out with a stick.
But Karait had lunged out too far and Rikki-tikki had sprung.
He jumped on the snake's back and bit high up the back and rolled away.
Teddy's mother picked Rikki-tikki up from the dust and hugged him.
She was crying because he had saved Teddy from death.
Rikki-tikki was rather amused by all the fuss.
As soon as Teddy was asleep that night, Rikkitikki went off for his nightly walk around the house.
In the dark he ran up against Chuchundra the Muskrat creeping by the wall.
"My cousin Chua the Rat told me - " said Chuchundra, and then he stopped.
"Told you what?"
"H'sh!
Nag is everywhere.
You should have talked to Chua in the garden."
"I didn't, so you must tell me."
Chuchundra sat down and cried.
"I mustn't tell you anything.
Can't you hear, Rikki-tikki?"
Rikki-tikki listened.
He thought he could just catch the faintest scratch-scratch.
It was the dry scratch of a snake's scales on brick.
"There's Nag," he said to himself. "
He is crawling into the bathroom drain."
Rikki-tikki stole off to Teddy's bathroom, but there was nothing there.
Then to Teddy's mother's bathroom.
At the bottom of the smooth wall there was a brick pulled out to make a drain for the bath water.
He heard Nag and Nagaina whispering outside in the moonlight.
"I will kill the big man, his wife, and the child," said Nag.
"Then the cottage will be empty and Rikki-tikki will go.
" Nag's head came through the drain.
Rikki-tikki heard him drinking from a water jar.
"When the man comes in to bathe in the morning, he will not have a stick.
I shall wait here until he comes.
Nagaina, do you hear me?"
Nag coiled himself around the bottom of the water jar.
No answer came from outside.
Rikki-tikki stayed as still as death.
After an hour he began to move toward the jar, muscle by muscle.
He wondered which would be the best place for a good hold.
"It must be the head above the hood," he said at last.
"When I am there, I must not let go."
Then he jumped.
He was battered to and fro, as a rat is shaken by a dog.
He held on as the body whipped over the floor.
He was dizzy and aching when something went off like a clap of thunder behind him.
The man had been wakened by the noise and had fired from a shotgun into Nag.
The big man picked him up.
"It's that mongoose again, Alice," he said.
"The little chap has saved our lives now."
When morning came, Rikki-tikki was very stiff, but pleased with his doings. "
Now I have Nagaina to settle with.
She will be worse than five Nags," he said.
Rikki-tikki ran to the thornbush where Darzee was singing a song of triumph at the top of his voice.
The news of Nag's death was all over the garden.
The sweeper had thrown his body on the rubbish heap.
"Where's Nagaina?" asked Rikki-tikki, looking carefully around him.
"On the rubbish heap by the stables, mourning for Nag.
Great is Rikki-tikki with the white teeth."
"Bother my white teeth!
Have you ever heard where she keeps her eggs?"
Rikki-tikki asked.
"In the melon bed on the end nearest the wall," Darzee replied.
"Darzee, if you have a grain of sense, you will fly off to the stables and pretend your wing is broken.
Let Nagaina chase you away from this bush.
I must go to the melon bed.
If I went there now, she would see me."
Darzee was a feather-brained little fellow.
But his wife was a sensible bird.
She knew cobra eggs meant young cobras later on.
So she flew off from the nest.
She fluttered in front of Nagaina and cried out, "Oh, my wing is broken!"
Nagaina lifted up her head and hissed, "You warned Rikki-tikki.
You've chosen a bad place to be lame."
She moved toward Darzee's wife, slipping along over the dust.
"The boy broke it with a stone!" shrieked Darzee's wife.
"I shall settle accounts with the boy.
What is the use of running away?
I am sure to catch you.
Little fool, look at me!"
Darzee's wife knew better than to do that.
She fluttered on.
Nagaina quickened her pace.
Rikki-tikki raced to the melon patch.
There he found twenty-five eggs.
"I was not a day too soon," he said.
He bit off the tops of the eggs as fast as he could.
He took care to crush the young cobras.
There were only three eggs left when he heard Darzee's wife screaming, "Rikki-tikki, I led Nagaina toward the house.
She has gone to the veranda.
She means killing!"
Rikki-tikki smashed two eggs and tumbled down the melon patch with the third egg in his mouth.
On the veranda, Teddy and his mother and father sat stone still with white faces.
Nagaina was coiled up by Teddy's chair, singing a song of triumph.
Rikki-tikki came up and cried, "Turn around, Nagaina.
Turn and fight!"
"All in good time," said she. "
Look at your friends.
They dare not move.
If you come a step nearer, I strike."
"Look at your eggs in the melon patch, Nagaina," said Rikki-tikki.
The big snake turned around and saw the egg on the veranda. "
Give it to me," she said.
Rikki-tikki put one paw on each side of the egg.
His eyes were blood-red.
"What price for a snake's egg?
For the last of the brood?
The ants are eating all the others."
Nagaina spun clear around, forgetting everything for the sake of the one egg.
Teddy's father shot out a big hand and caught Teddy by the shoulder.
He dragged him to safety.
"Give me the egg, Rikki-tikki, and I will go away and never come back."
She lowered her head.
"Yes, you will go away.
You will go to the rubbish heap with Nag.
Fight!"
His little eyes were like hot coals.
Nagaina gathered herself and flung out at him.
Rikki-tikki jumped up and backward.
Again and again she struck.
He had forgotten the egg.
Nagaina came nearer and nearer to it.
At last, she caught it in her mouth and flew like an arrow down the path with Rikki-tikki behind her.
Nagaina plunged into the rat hole where she and Nag used to live.
Rikki-tikki's white teeth were clenched on her tail and he went down with her.
Darzee said, "It is all over for Rikki-tikki!
Nagaina will surely kill him underground."
So he sang a very mournful song.
Just as he got to the most touching part, the grass over the hole quivered.
Rikki-tikki dragged himself out of the hole leg by leg, licking his whiskers.
"It is all over," he said.
He curled himself up in the grass and slept where he was till it was late afternoon.
When he awoke, he said, "I will go back to the house.
Tell the Coppersmith, Darzee.
He will tell the garden Nagaina is dead."
The Coppersmith is a bird who is the town crier to every Indian garden.
As Rikki-tikki went up the path, he heard the bird. "
Ding-dong-tock!
Nag is dead!
Nagaina is dead!
Ding-dong-tock!"
That night at the house Rikki-tikki ate all that was given to him.
He went to bed on Teddy's shoulder.
He had a right to be proud of himself.
But he did not grow too proud.
He kept that garden with tooth and jump and bite, till never a cobra dared show its head inside the walls.
I will remember what I was.
I am sick of rope and chain.
I will remember my old strength and all my forest affairs.
I will not sell my back to man for a bundle of sugarcane.
I will go out to my own kind, and the wood folk in their lairs.
I will go out until the day, until the morning break -
Out to the wind's wholesome kiss, the water's clean caress -
I will forget my ankle ring and snap my picket stake.
I will revisit my lost loves, and playmates masterless!
Kala Nag had served the Indian Government in every way an elephant can for forty-seven years.
He was twenty years old when he was caught.
That makes him nearly seventy, a ripe age for an elephant.
His mother told him elephants who were afraid always got hurt.
So he gave up being afraid.
He was the best-loved elephant in the service of the Government of India.
He was employed in helping to catch wild elephants among the Garo hills.
Big Toomai was his driver and grandson of Toomai of the Elephants, who had seen Kala Nag caught.
He said, "There is nothing the Black Snake fears except for me.
He has seen three generations of us feed him and groom him.
He will live to see four."
"He is afraid of me, also," said Little Toomai.
He stood up to his full height of four feet.
He was ten years old.
Even a little boy could be of use in the camp.
Toomai was as useful as three boys.
The really good time came when the driving out began.
Then Little Toomai would climb to the top of one of the pen posts.
He would shout and the big fight between Kala Nag and the wild elephant would sway to and fro across the pen.
The old elephant catchers would wipe the sweat out of their eyes and find time to nod to Little Toomai.
Sometimes he did more than wiggle.
One night Little Toomai slid down from the post and slipped in between the elephants.
He threw up the loose end of a rope to a driver who was trying to grab onto the leg of a young calf.
Calves always give more trouble.
Kala Nag saw him, caught him in his trunk, and handed him up to Big Toomai.
Big Toomai put him back on the post.
The next morning, Big Toomai gave Little Toomai a scolding. "
Now those foolish hunters have spoken to Petersen Sahib of the matter."
"What will happen?" said Little Toomai.
"Petersen Sahib is a madman.
He may require you to be an elephant catcher, to sleep in these fever-filled jungles.
You could be trampled to death in the Keddah, the pen.
Shame!
Go!"
Little Toomai went off without saying a word.
But he told Kala Nag all his sorrows while he examined his feet for thorns.
Petersen Sahib came in on his she-elephant, Pudmini.
He had been paying off other camps among the hills.
The season was coming to an end.
There was a native clerk sitting at a table under a tree to pay the drivers their wages.
Big Toomai went up to the clerk with Little Toomai behind him.
Machua Appa, the head tracker, said quietly to a friend, "There goes good elephant stuff at least. '
Tis a pity to send that young jungle cock to rot in the plains."
Now Petersen Sahib had ears all over him.
He called down from his place on Pudmini's back.
"What is that?
I did not know of a man among the plains drivers who had wit enough to rope even a dead elephant."
"This is not a man, but a boy.
He went into the Keddah at the last drive and threw Barmao the rope."
Machua Appa pointed to Little Toomai.
"He threw a rope?
He is smaller than a picket pin.
Little one, what is your name?" said Petersen Sahib.
Kala Nag was behind him and Little Toomai made a sign with his hand.
The elephant caught him up in his trunk and held him level with Pudmini's forehead.
"Oho!" said Petersen Sahib.
"Why did you teach your elephant that trick?
Was it to help you steal green corn from the roofs of the houses when the corn is put out to dry?"
"Not green corn, Protector of the Poor, melons," said Little Toomai.
"See here, little one.
Here are four annas to spend in sweetmeats.
In time you may become a hunter, too.
Remember that Keddahs are not good for children to play in."
"Must I never go there, Sahib?" Little Toomai said with a gasp.
"Yes."
Petersen Sahib smiled.
"When you have seen the elephants dance.
That is the proper time.
"That is an old joke among elephant catchers and it means never.
No man has ever seen the elephants dance.
Little Toomai gave the silver to his mother.
All of his family was put up on Kala Nag's back.
Then a line of grunting elephants rolled down the hill path to the plains.
A driver said, "The elephants know the drives are ended for the season.
All the wild elephants will dance tonight.
It benefits your father to double chain his pickets tonight."
At the camp, the elephants were chained by their hind legs to pickets.
When Little Toomai felt sleepy, he stretched himself on the hay at Kala Nag's side.
Little Toomai slept for some time.
When he woke it was brilliant moonlight.
Kala Nag was still standing up with his ears cocked.
Little Toomai heard from far away the "hoottoot" of a wild elephant.
All the elephants in the lines jumped up as if they had been shot.
Their grunts woke the sleeping men.
They came and drove in the picket pegs with big hammers.
One new elephant had nearly ruined his picket.
Big Toomai took off Kala Nag's leg chain and shackled the new elephant from forefoot to hind foot.
Big Toomai slipped a loop of string round Kala Nag's leg and told him to remember that he was tied fast.
Kala Nag stood still, looking out across the moonlight.
"Tend to him, if he grows restless in the night," said Big Toomai to Little Toomai.
He went into the hut and slept.
Little Toomai was just going to sleep when he heard the string snap.
Kala Nag rolled out of his pickets as silently as a cloud.
Little Toomai hurried after him down the road in the moonlight.
"Kala Nag!"
he called under his breath. "
Take me with you, O Kala Nag!"
The elephant turned, took three strides back to the boy, and swung him up to his neck with his trunk.
Almost before Little Toomai had settled his knees, Kala Nag slipped into the forest.
He moved without any sound uphill.
When Kala Nag reached the crest of the hill, he stopped for a minute.
Toomai leaned forward to look and felt that the forest was awake below him.
Kala Nag began to go down into the valley in one rush.
The undergrowth on either side of him ripped with a noise like torn canvas.
Little Toomai laid himself down close to the great neck to keep branches from sweeping him to the ground.
There was a splash and a trample.
Kala Nag strode through the bed of a river.
Little Toomai could hear more splashing and some trumpeting both upstream and down.
"Ai!"
he said, his teeth chattering. "
The elephant folk are out tonight.
It is the dance, then!"
Kala Nag splashed out of the water, blew his trunk clear, and began another climb.
Then an elephant trumpeted and they all took it up for five or ten terrible seconds.
A dull booming noise began.
It grew and grew.
Kala Nag lifted up one forefoot and then the other.
The elephants were stamping all together now.
It sounded like a war drum beaten at the mouth of a cave.
Little Toomai put his hands to his ears to shut out the sound.
But it was one gigantic jar that ran through him.
It must have lasted two hours and Little Toomai ached.
But he knew by the smell of the night air that dawn was coming.
The morning broke in one sheet of pale yellow.
The booming stopped with the first ray.
Before the ringing had gone out of Little Toomai's head there was not an elephant in sight except Kala Nag and Pudmini.
"Kala Nag, let us keep by Pudmini and go to Petersen Sahib's camp," said Little Toomai.
His eyes were very heavy.
Petersen Sahib was eating an early breakfast when Pudmini shuffled into camp with Kala Nag.
Little Toomai's face was gray and his hair was full of leaves.
But he tried to salute Petersen Sahib.
"The dance, the elephant dance!"
Little Toomai cried faintly.
"I have seen it. ."
" As Kala Nag sat down, Toomai slid off his neck in a dead faint.
Little Toomai slept through the long afternoon in Petersen Sahib's hammock.
While he slept, Petersen Sahib and Machua Appa followed the elephant tracks for fifteen miles across the hills to the elephant ballroom.
"Forty years and five have I followed my lord, the elephant," said Machua Appa.
"
But never have I heard that any child of man had seen what this child has seen."
In the evening, there was a feast by the blazing campfires in front of the lines of picketed elephants.
Little Toomai was the hero of it all.
Machua Appa leaped to his feet with Little Toomai held high in the air.
He shouted, "This little one shall no more be called Little Toomai, but Toomai of the Elephants as his great-grandfather was.
He shall become a great tracker."
He whirled up the lines of chains.
"My lords in the chains, make your salute to Toomai of the Elephants!"
The whole line flung up their trunks and broke out into the full salute, a crashing trumpet sound.
All for the sake of Little Toomai, who had seen the dance of the elephants at night and alone in the heart of the Garo hills!
You can work it out by Fractions or by simple Rule of Three,
But the way of Tweedle-dum is not the way of Tweedle-dee.
You can twist it, you can turn it, you can braid it till you drop,
But the way of Pilly Winky's not the way of Winkie Pop!
It had been raining heavily for one whole month.
A camp of 30,000 men and thousands of camels, elephants, horses, steers, and mules all gathered together at a place called Rawal Pindi.
They were all going to be reviewed by the Viceroy of India.
And he was being visited by a wild king of a very wild country.
The king had brought with him 800 men and horses who had never seen a camp before in their lives.
Every night a mob of these horses would be sure to break their ropes and stampede up and down the camp.
Or the camels would break loose and fall over the ropes of the tents.
My tent lay far away from the camel lines and I thought I was safe.
But one night a man popped his head in and shouted, "Get out, quick!
They're coming!"
I put on my boots and raincoat and scuttled out into the slush.
Little Vixen, my fox terrier, went out through the other side.
I saw the tent cave in and begin to dance about like a mad ghost.
A camel had stumbled into it.
I ran on because I did not know how many camels might have gotten loose.
At last I fell over the tail end of a gun.
I knew I was somewhere near the weapon lines where the cannons were stacked at night.
I put my raincoat over the muzzle of one gun and made a sort of wigwam with some equipment I found.
Just as I was getting ready to sleep, I heard a jingle of harness and a grunt.
A mule passed by shaking his wet ears.
Behind the mule there was a camel, his big feet slipping in the mud.
I knew enough of beast language to know what he was saying.
He called to the mule, "What shall I do?
I have fought with a white Thing that waved.
It took a stick and hit me on the neck.
Shall we run on?"
"Oh, it was you," said the mule.
"You and your friends have been disturbing the camp?
Sit down and keep your silly neck quiet."
The camel sat down whimpering.
There was a regular beat of hoofs in the darkness.
A big troop horse cantered up as though he were on parade.
He jumped a gun tail and landed close to the mule.
"It's disgraceful," he said, blowing out his nostrils.
"How's a horse to keep his condition if he isn't allowed to sleep?
Who's here?"
"I'm a mule of number two gun of the First Screw Gun Battery," said the Mule.
"Who are you?"
"Number Fifteen, E troop, Ninth Lancers.
Dick Cunliffe's horse."
"My lords," said the camel humbly.
"We dreamed bad dreams in the night and were very much afraid.
I am only a baggage camel of the 39th Native Infantry.
I am not as brave as you are."
The mule cocked one ear and listened. "
Gun steers.
You and your friends have waked the camp very thoroughly."
I heard a chain dragging along the ground.
A yoke of the sulky white steers that drag the heavy siege guns near the firing came along together.
Almost stepping on the chain was another battery mule, calling wildly for Billy.
"That's one of our recruits," said the old mule to the troop horse. "
He's calling for me.
Here, youngster, stop squealing."
The young mule huddled close to Billy.
"Fearful and horrible things, Billy!" he said.
"D'you think they'll kill us?"
"Stop shaking," said Billy.
"My head-rope broke and I couldn't find my driver.
And I couldn't find you, Billy.
So I ran off with these gentlemen."
"Who are you fellows on the ground there?" said Billy.
The gun steers rolled their cud and answered both together. "
The seventh yoke of the first gun of the Big Gun Battery.
When we were trampled, we got up and walked away.
" They went on chewing.
"Anyone can be forgiven for being scared in the night, if they see things they don't understand," said the troop horse.
"What do you do on active service?" said Billy.
"Dick Cunliff's on my back then.
All I have to do is to watch where I am putting my feet.
And keep my hind legs well under me and be bridle-wise."
"What's bridle-wise?" asked the young mule.
"Do you mean to say you aren't taught to be bridle-wise in your business?"
snorted the troop horse.
Billy the Mule said stiffly, "We're taught to obey the man at our head.
Step off when he says so and step in when he says so.
What do you do?"
"Generally I have to go in among a lot of yelling, hairy men with knives.
I have to take care that Dick's boot is just touching the next man's boot without crushing it."
"Sounds very foolish," said Billy.
"Knives are dirty things.
The proper thing to do is to climb up a mountain and hang on by all four feet till you come out onto a ledge.
There's just enough room for your hooves.
Then you keep quiet while the guns are being put together and watch little poppy shells drop down into the trees far below."
The baggage camel had been bobbing its head for some time.
Then I heard him clear his throat.
He said nervously, "I-I have fought a little.
But not in that climbing way or that running way."
"How was it, old Haybale?" said Billy.
"The proper way," said the camel.
"We all sat down, a hundred of us in a big square.
They fired over our backs, the men did.
I am not frightened then.
I sit still and wait."
Then one of the steers lifted up his big head.
"This is very foolish," he said.
"There is only one way of fighting."
"I suppose you fellows fight standing on your tails?" said Billy.
"This is the way.
To put all twenty yoke of us to the big gun as soon as Two Tails trumpets. "
Two Tails is a camp phrase for "elephant."
"Then we tug the big gun all together across the level plain.
We graze while the big guns talk across the plain to some town with mud walls."
"It is very lucky for us all that we haven't got to fight in the same way," said the troop horse.
The young mule had been quiet for a long time.
He said, "What I want to know is, why do we have to fight at all?"
"Because we're told to," said the troop horse with a snort.
"Orders," said Billy, and his teeth snapped.
"Yes, but who gives the orders?" said the recruit mule.
"The man who walks at your head."
"Or sits on your back."
"Or holds the nose rope."
"Or twists your tail."
"But who gives them orders?"
"Now you want to know too much, young'un," said Billy.
The gun steers got up to go. "
Morning is coming.
We will go back to our lines."
"Come along, young'un. We'll go back.
"
Billy the Mule stomped off with the swaggering limp of an old soldier.
"I must go back to Dick," said the troop horse.
"My tail's all muddy and he'll have two hours hard work dressing me for parade."
The big parade was held that afternoon.
Vixen and I had a good place close to the Viceroy and the king.
Regiments went by in wave upon wave of legs all moving together.
Then the cavalry came up.
The second squadron of the Lancers shot by.
There was the troop horse with his tail like spun silk, his head pulled into his chest.
He set the time for all his squadron as smoothly as waltz music.
Then the big guns came by and I saw Two Tails harnessed to a forty-pounder siege gun.
Twenty yoke of oxen walked behind.
The seventh pair looked rather stiff and tired.
Last came the screw-guns.
Billy the Mule carried himself as though he commanded all the troops.
I gave a cheer all by myself for Billy, but he never looked right or left.
ELEPHANTS OF THE GUN TEAMS
We lent to Alexander the strength of Hercules,
The wisdom of our foreheads, the cunning of our knees;
We bowed our necks to service: they ne'er were loosed again, -
Make way there - way for the ten-foot teams
Of the Forty-Pounder train!
GUN BULLOCKS
Those heroes in their harnesses avoid a cannonball,
And what they know of powder upsets them one and all;
Then we come into action and tug the guns again -
Make way there - way for the twenty yoke
Of the Forty-Pounder train!
CAVALRY HORSES
By the brand on my shoulder, the finest of tunes
Is played by the Lancers, Hussars, and Dragoons,
And it's sweeter than "Stables" or "Water" to me -
The Cavalry Canter of "Bonnie Dundee!"
Then feed us and break us and handle and groom,
And give us good riders and plenty of room,
And launch us in column of squadron and see
The way of the war-horse to "Bonnie Dundee"!
SCREW-GUN MULES
As me and my companions were scrambling up a hill,
The path was lost in rolling stones, but we went forward still;
For we can wriggle and climb, my lads, and turn up everywhere,
Oh, it's our delight on a mountain height, with a leg or two to spare!
Good luck to every sergeant, then, that lets us pick our road;
Bad luck to all the driver-men that cannot pack a load;
For we can wriggle and climb, my lads, and turn up everywhere,
Oh, it's our delight on a mountain height, with a leg or two to spare!
COMMISSARIAT CAMELS
We haven't a camelty tune of our own
To help us trollop along,
But every neck is a hair trombone
(Rtt-ta-ta-ta! is a hair trombone!)
And this our marching-song:
Can't!
Don't!
Shan't!
Won't!
Pass it along the line!
Somebody'spack has slid from his back,
Wish it were only mine!
Somebody's load has tipped off in the road -
Cheer for a halt and a row!
Urrr!
Yarrh!
Grr!
Arrh!
Somebody's catching it now!
ALL THE BEASTS TOGETHER
Children of the Camp are we,
Serving each in his degree;
Children of the yoke and goad,
Pack and harness, pad and load.
See our line across the plain,
Like a heel-rope bent again,
Reaching, writhing, rolling far,
Sweeping all away to war!
While the men that walk beside,
Dusty, silent, heavy-eyed,
Cannot tell why we or they
March and suffer day by day.
Children of the Camp are we,
Serving each in his degree;
Children of the yoke and goad,
Pack and harness, pad and load!