Next day we started early.
We had to hasten forward.
It was a three days' march to the cross roads.
I will not speak of the sufferings we endured in our return. My uncle bore them with the angry impatience of a man obliged to own his weakness; Hans with the resignation of his passive nature; I, I confess, with complaints and expressions of despair.
I had no spirit to oppose this ill fortune.
As I had foretold, the water failed entirely by the end of the first day's retrograde march. Our fluid aliment was now nothing but gin; but this infernal fluid burned my throat, and I could not even endure the sight of it. I found the temperature and the air stifling.
Fatigue paralysed my limbs.
More than once I dropped down motionless.
Then there was a halt; and my uncle and the Icelander did their best to restore me.
But I saw that the former was struggling painfully against excessive fatigue and the tortures of thirst.
At last, on Tuesday, July 8, we arrived on our hands and knees, and half dead, at the junction of the two roads.
There I dropped like a lifeless lump, extended on the lava soil.
It was ten in the morning.
Hans and my uncle, clinging to the wall, tried to nibble a few bits of biscuit.
Long moans escaped from my swollen lips.
After some time my uncle approached me and raised me in his arms.
"Poor boy!"
said he, in genuine tones of compassion.
I was touched with these words, not being accustomed to see the excitable Professor in a softened mood.
I grasped his trembling hands in mine.
He let me hold them and looked at me.
His eyes were moistened.
Then I saw him take the flask that was hanging at his side.
To my amazement he placed it on my lips.
"Drink!"
said he.
Had I heard him?
Was my uncle beside himself?
I stared at, him stupidly, and felt as if I could not understand him.
"Drink!"
he said again.
And raising his flask he emptied it every drop between my lips.
Oh!
infinite pleasure!
a slender sip of water came to moisten my burning mouth.
It was but one sip but it was enough to recall my ebbing life.
I thanked my uncle with clasped hands.
"Yes," he said, "a draught of water; but it is the very last - you hear! - the last. I had kept it as a precious treasure at the bottom of my flask. Twenty times, nay, a hundred times, have I fought against a frightful impulse to drink it off.
But no, Axel, I kept it for you."
"My dear uncle," I said, whilst hot tears trickled down my face.
"Yes, my poor boy, I knew that as soon as you arrived at these cross roads you would drop half dead, and I kept my last drop of water to reanimate you."
"Thank you, thank you," I said.
Although my thirst was only partially quenched, yet some strength had returned.
The muscles of my throat, until then contracted, now relaxed again; and the inflammation of my lips abated somewhat; and I was now able to speak.
.
"Let us see," I said, "we have now but one thing to do.
We have no water; we must go back."
While I spoke my uncle avoided looking at me; he hung his head down; his eyes avoided mine.
"We must return," I exclaimed vehemently; "we must go back on our way to Snaefell.
May God give us strength to climb up the crater again!"
"Return!"
said my uncle, as if he was rather answering himself than me.
"Yes, return, without the loss of a minute."
A long silence followed.
"So then, Axel," replied the Professor ironically, "you have found no courage or energy in these few drops of water?"
"Courage?"
"I see you just as feeble-minded as you were before, and still expressing only despair!"
What sort of a man was this I had to do with, and what schemes was he now revolving in his fearless mind?
"What!
you won't go back?"
"Should I renounce this expedition just when we have the fairest chance of success!
Never!"
"Then must we resign ourselves to destruction?"
"No, Axel, no; go back.
Hans will go with you.
Leave me to myself!"
"Leave you here!"
"Leave me, I tell you.
I have undertaken this expedition.
I will carry it out to the end, and I will not return.
Go, Axel, go!"
My uncle was in high state of excitement. His voice, which had for a moment been tender and gentle, had now become hard and threatening. He was struggling with gloomy resolutions against impossibilities.
I would not leave him in this bottomless abyss, and on the other hand the instinct of self-preservation prompted me to fly.
The guide watched this scene with his usual phlegmatic unconcern. Yet he understood perfectly well what was going on between his two companions.
The gestures themselves were sufficient to show that we were each bent on taking a different road; but Hans seemed to take no part in a question upon which depended his life.
He was ready to start at a given signal, or to stay, if his master so willed it.
How I wished at this moment I could have made him understand me. My words, my complaints, my sorrow would have had some influence over that frigid nature. Those dangers which our guide could not understand I could have demonstrated and proved to him.
Together we might have over-ruled the obstinate Professor; if it were needed, we might perhaps have compelled him to regain the heights of Snaefell.
I drew near to Hans.
I placed my hand upon his.
He made no movement.
My parted lips sufficiently revealed my sufferings.
The Icelander slowly moved his head, and calmly pointing to my uncle said:
"Master."
"Master!"
I shouted; "you madman!
no, he is not the master of our life; we must fly, we must drag him.
Do you hear me?
Do you understand?"
I had seized Hans by the arm.
I wished to oblige him to rise.
I strove with him.
My uncle interposed.
"Be calm, Axel!
you will get nothing from that immovable servant.
Therefore, listen to my proposal."
I crossed my arms, and confronted my uncle boldly.
"The want of water," he said, "is the only obstacle in our way.
In this eastern gallery made up of lavas, schists, and coal, we have not met with a single particle of moisture.
Perhaps we shall be more fortunate if we follow the western tunnel."
I shook my head incredulously.
"Hear me to the end," the Professor went on with a firm voice. "Whilst you were lying there motionless, I went to examine the conformation of that gallery. It penetrates directly downward, and in a few hours it will bring us to the granite rocks.
There we must meet with abundant springs.
The nature of the rock assures me of this, and instinct agrees with logic to support my conviction.
Now, this is my proposal.
When Columbus asked of his ships' crews for three days more to discover a new world, those crews, disheartened and sick as they were, recognised the justice of the claim, and he discovered America.
I am the Columbus of this nether world, and I only ask for one more day.
If in a single day I have not met with the water that we want, I swear to you we will return to the surface of the earth."
In spite of my irritation I was moved with these words, as well as with the violence my uncle was doing to his own wishes in making so hazardous a proposal.
"Well," I said, "do as you will, and God reward your superhuman energy.
You have now but a few hours to tempt fortune.
Let us start!"
This time the descent commenced by the new gallery.
Hans walked first as was his custom.
We had not gone a hundred yards when the Professor, moving his lantern along the walls, cried:
"Here are primitive rocks.
Now we are in the right way.
Forward!"
When in its early stages the earth was slowly cooling, its contraction gave rise in its crust to disruptions, distortions, fissures, and chasms. The passage through which we were moving was such a fissure, through which at one time granite poured out in a molten state.
Its thousands of windings formed an inextricable labyrinth through the primeval mass.
As fast as we descended, the succession of beds forming the primitive foundation came out with increasing distinctness.
Geologists consider this primitive matter to be the base of the mineral crust of the earth, and have ascertained it to be composed of three different formations, schist, gneiss, and mica schist, resting upon that unchangeable foundation, the granite.
Never had mineralogists found themselves in so marvellous a situation to study nature in situ.
What the boring machine, an insensible, inert instrument, was unable to bring to the surface of the inner structure of the globe, we were able to peruse with our own eyes and handle with our own hands.
Through the beds of schist, coloured with delicate shades of green, ran in winding course threads of copper and manganese, with traces of platinum and gold.
I thought, what riches are here buried at an unapproachable depth in the earth, hidden for ever from the covetous eyes of the human race!
These treasures have been buried at such a profound depth by the convulsions of primeval times that they run no chance of ever being molested by the pickaxe or the spade.
To the schists succeeded gneiss, partially stratified, remarkable for the parallelism and regularity of its lamina, then mica schists, laid in large plates or flakes, revealing their lamellated structure by the sparkle of the white shining mica.
The light from our apparatus, reflected from the small facets of quartz, shot sparkling rays at every angle, and I seemed to be moving through a diamond, within which the quickly darting rays broke across each other in a thousand flashing coruscations.
About six o'clock this brilliant fete of illuminations underwent a sensible abatement of splendour, then almost ceased.
The walls assumed a crystallised though sombre appearance; mica was more closely mingled with the feldspar and quartz to form the proper rocky foundations of the earth, which bears without distortion or crushing the weight of the four terrestrial systems.
We were immured within prison walls of granite.
It was eight in the evening.
No signs of water had yet appeared.
I was suffering horribly.
My uncle strode on.
He refused to stop.
He was listening anxiously for the murmur of distant springs.
But, no, there was dead silence.
And now my limbs were failing beneath me.
I resisted pain and torture, that I might not stop my uncle, which would have driven him to despair, for the day was drawing near to its end, and it was his last.
At last I failed utterly; I uttered a cry and fell.
"Come to me, I am dying."
My uncle retraced his steps.
He gazed upon me with his arms crossed; then these muttered words passed his lips:
"It's all over!"
The last thing I saw was a fearful gesture of rage, and my eyes closed.
When I reopened them I saw my two companions motionless and rolled up in their coverings. Were they asleep? As for me, I could not get one moment's sleep. I was suffering too keenly, and what embittered my thoughts was that there was no remedy.
My uncle's last words echoed painfully in my ears: "it's all over!"
For in such a fearful state of debility it was madness to think of ever reaching the upper world again.
We had above us a league and a half of terrestrial crust.
The weight of it seemed to be crushing down upon my shoulders.
I felt weighed down, and I exhausted myself with imaginary violent exertions to turn round upon my granite couch.
A few hours passed away.
A deep silence reigned around us, the silence of the grave.
No sound could reach us through walls, the thinnest of which were five miles thick.
Yet in the midst of my stupefaction I seemed to be aware of a noise.
It was dark down the tunnel, but I seemed to see the Icelander vanishing from our sight with the lamp in his hand.
Why was he leaving us?
Was Hans going to forsake us?
My uncle was fast asleep.
I wanted to shout, but my voice died upon my parched and swollen lips.
The darkness became deeper, and the last sound died away in the far distance.
"Hans has abandoned us," I cried.
"Hans!
Hans!"
But these words were only spoken within me. They went no farther. Yet after the first moment of terror I felt ashamed of suspecting a man of such extraordinary faithfulness. Instead of ascending he was descending the gallery. An evil design would have taken him up not down.
This reflection restored me to calmness, and I turned to other thoughts.
None but some weighty motive could have induced so quiet a man to forfeit his sleep.
Was he on a journey of discovery?
Had he during the silence of the night caught a sound, a murmuring of something in the distance, which had failed to affect my hearing?
For a whole hour I was trying to work out in my delirious brain the reasons which might have influenced this seemingly tranquil huntsman.
The absurdest notions ran in utter confusion through my mind.
I thought madness was coming on!
But at last a noise of footsteps was heard in the dark abyss.
Hans was approaching.
A flickering light was beginning to glimmer on the wall of our darksome prison; then it came out full at the mouth of the gallery.
Hans appeared.
He drew close to my uncle, laid his hand upon his shoulder, and gently woke him.
My uncle rose up.
"What is the matter?"
he asked.
"Watten!"
replied the huntsman.
No doubt under the inspiration of intense pain everybody becomes endowed with the gift of divers tongues.
I did not know a word of Danish, yet instinctively I understood the word he had uttered.
"Water!
water!"
I cried, clapping my hands and gesticulating like a madman.
"Water!"
repeated my uncle.
"Hvar?"
he asked, in Icelandic.
"Nedat," replied Hans.
"Where?
Down below!"
I understood it all.
I seized the hunter's hands, and pressed them while he looked on me without moving a muscle of his countenance.
The preparations for our departure were not long in making, and we were soon on our way down a passage inclining two feet in seven.
In an hour we had gone a mile and a quarter, and descended two thousand feet.
Then I began to hear distinctly quite a new sound of something running within the thickness of the granite wall, a kind of dull, dead rumbling, like distant thunder.
During the first part of our walk, not meeting with the promised spring, I felt my agony returning; but then my uncle acquainted me with the cause of the strange noise.
"Hans was not mistaken," he said.
"What you hear is the rushing of a torrent."
"A torrent?"
I exclaimed.
"There can be no doubt; a subterranean river is flowing around us."
We hurried forward in the greatest excitement. I was no longer sensible of my fatigue. This murmuring of waters close at hand was already refreshing me. It was audibly increasing.
The torrent, after having for some time flowed over our heads, was now running within the left wall, roaring and rushing.
Frequently I touched the wall, hoping to feel some indications of moisture: But there was no hope here.
Yet another half hour, another half league was passed.
Then it became clear that the hunter had gone no farther.
Guided by an instinct peculiar to mountaineers he had as it were felt this torrent through the rock; but he had certainly seen none of the precious liquid; he had drunk nothing himself.
Soon it became evident that if we continued our walk we should widen the distance between ourselves and the stream, the noise of which was becoming fainter.
We returned.
Hans stopped where the torrent seemed closest.
I sat near the wall, while the waters were flowing past me at a distance of two feet with extreme violence.
But there was a thick granite wall between us and the object of our desires.
Without reflection, without asking if there were any means of procuring the water, I gave way to a movement of despair.
Hans glanced at me with, I thought, a smile of compassion.
He rose and took the lamp. I followed him. He moved towards the wall. I looked on. He applied his ear against the dry stone, and moved it slowly to and fro, listening intently.
I perceived at once that he was examining to find the exact place where the torrent could be heard the loudest.
He met with that point on the left side of the tunnel, at three feet from the ground.
I was stirred up with excitement.
I hardly dared guess what the hunter was about to do.
But I could not but understand, and applaud and cheer him on, when I saw him lay hold of the pickaxe to make an attack upon the rock.
"We are saved!"
I cried.
"Yes," cried my uncle, almost frantic with excitement.
"Hans is right.
Capital fellow!
Who but he would have thought of it?"
Yes; who but he? Such an expedient, however simple, would never have entered into our minds. True, it seemed most hazardous to strike a blow of the hammer in this part of the earth's structure. Suppose some displacement should occur and crush us all!
Suppose the torrent, bursting through, should drown us in a sudden flood!
There was nothing vain in these fancies.
But still no fears of falling rocks or rushing floods could stay us now; and our thirst was so intense that, to satisfy it, we would have dared the waves of the north Atlantic.
Hans set about the task which my uncle and I together could not have accomplished. If our impatience had armed our hands with power, we should have shattered the rock into a thousand fragments. Not so Hans.
Full of self possession, he calmly wore his way through the rock with a steady succession of light and skilful strokes, working through an aperture six inches wide at the outside.
I could hear a louder noise of flowing waters, and I fancied I could feel the delicious fluid refreshing my parched lips.
The pick had soon penetrated two feet into the granite partition, and our man had worked for above an hour. I was in an agony of impatience.
My uncle wanted to employ stronger measures, and I had some difficulty in dissuading him; still he had just taken a pickaxe in his hand, when a sudden hissing was heard, and a jet of water spurted out with violence against the opposite wall.
Hans, almost thrown off his feet by the violence of the shock, uttered a cry of grief and disappointment, of which I soon under-.
stood the cause, when plunging my hands into the spouting torrent, I withdrew them in haste, for the water was scalding hot.
"The water is at the boiling point," I cried.
"Well, never mind, let it cool," my uncle replied.
The tunnel was filling with steam, whilst a stream was forming, which by degrees wandered away into subterranean windings, and soon we had the satisfaction of swallowing our first draught.
Could anything be more delicious than the sensation that our burning intolerable thirst was passing away, and leaving us to enjoy comfort and pleasure? But where was this water from? No matter. It was water; and though still warm, it brought life back to the dying.
I kept drinking without stopping, and almost without tasting.
At last after a most delightful time of reviving energy, I cried, "Why, this is a chalybeate spring!"
"Nothing could be better for the digestion," said my uncle.
"It is highly impregnated with iron.
It will be as good for us as going to the Spa, or to Toeplitz."
"Well, it is delicious!"
"Of course it is, water should be, found six miles underground.
It has an inky flavour, which is not at all unpleasant.
What a capital source of strength Hans has found for us here.
We will call it after his name."
"Agreed," I cried.
And Hansbach it was from that moment.
Hans was none the prouder.
After a moderate draught, he went quietly into a corner to rest.
"Now," I said, "we must not lose this water."
"What is the use of troubling ourselves?"
my uncle, replied.
"I fancy it will never fail."
"Never mind, we cannot be sure; let us fill the water bottle and our flasks, and then stop up the opening."
My advice was followed so far as getting in a supply; but the stopping up of the hole was not so easy to accomplish. It was in vain that we took up fragments of granite, and stuffed them in with tow, we only scalded our hands without succeeding.
The pressure was too great, and our efforts were fruitless.
"It is quite plain," said I, "that the higher body of this water is at a considerable elevation.
The force of the jet shows that."
"No doubt," answered my uncle.
"If this column of water is 32,000 feet high - that is, from the surface of the earth, it is equal to the weight of a thousand atmospheres.
But I have got an idea."
"Well?"
"Why should we trouble ourselves to stop the stream from coming out at all?"
"Because - " Well, I could not assign a reason.
"When our flasks are empty, where shall we fill them again?
Can we tell that?"
No; there was no certainty.
"Well, let us allow the water to run on.
It will flow down, and will both guide and refresh us."
"That is well planned," I cried.
"With this stream for our guide, there is no reason why we should not succeed in our undertaking."
"Ah, my boy!
you agree with me now," cried the Professor, laughing.
"I agree with you most heartily."
"Well, let us rest awhile; and then we will start again."
I was forgetting that it was night.
The chronometer soon informed me of that fact; and in a very short time, refreshed and thankful, we all three fell into a sound sleep.
By the next day we had forgotten all our sufferings.
At first, I was wondering that I was no longer thirsty, and I was for asking for the reason.
The answer came in the murmuring of the stream at my feet.
We breakfasted, and drank of this excellent chalybeate water. I felt wonderfully stronger, and quite decided upon pushing on.
Why should not so firmly convinced a man as my uncle, furnished with so industrious a guide as Hans, and accompanied by so determined a nephew as myself, go on to final success?
Such were the magnificent plans which struggled for mastery within me.
If it had been proposed to me to return to the summit of Snaefell, I should have indignantly declined.
Most fortunately, all we had to do was to descend.
"Let us start!"
I cried, awakening by my shouts the echoes of the vaulted hollows of the earth.
On Thursday, at 8 a.m., we started afresh. The granite tunnel winding from side to side, earned us past unexpected turns, and seemed almost to form a labyrinth; but, on the whole, its direction seemed to be south-easterly.
My uncle never ceased to consult his compass, to keep account of the ground gone over.
The gallery dipped down a very little way from the horizontal, scarcely more than two inches in a fathom, and the stream ran gently murmuring at our feet.
I compared it to a friendly genius guiding us underground, and caressed with my hand the soft naiad, whose comforting voice accompanied our steps.
With my reviving spirits these mythological notions seemed to come unbidden.
As for my uncle, he was beginning to storm against the horizontal road. He loved nothing better than a vertical path; but this way seemed indefinitely prolonged, and instead of sliding along the hypothenuse as we were now doing, he would willingly have dropped down the terrestrial radius.
But there was no help for it, and as long as we were approaching the centre at all we felt that we must not complain.
From time to time, a steeper path appeared; our naiad then began to tumble before us with a hoarser murmur, and we went down with her to a greater depth.
On the whole, that day and the next we made considerable way horizontally, very little vertically.
On Friday evening, the 10th of July, according to our calculations, we were thirty leagues south-east of Rejkiavik, and at a depth of two leagues and a half.
At our feet there now opened a frightful abyss.
My uncle, however, was not to be daunted, and he clapped his hands at the steepness of the descent.
"This will take us a long way," he cried, "and without much difficulty; for the projections in the rock form quite a staircase."
The ropes were so fastened by Hans as to guard against accident, and the descent commenced.
I can hardly call it perilous, for I was beginning to be familiar with this kind of exercise.
This well, or abyss, was a narrow cleft in the mass of the granite, called by geologists a 'fault,' and caused by the unequal cooling of the globe of the earth.
If it had at one time been a passage for eruptive matter thrown out by Snaefell, I still could not understand why no trace was left of its passage.
We kept going down a kind of winding staircase, which seemed almost to have been made by the hand of man.
Every quarter of an hour we were obliged to halt, to take a little necessary repose and restore the action of our limbs.
We then sat down upon a fragment of rock, and we talked as we ate and drank from the stream.
Of course, down this fault the Hansbach fell in a cascade, and lost some of its volume; but there was enough and to spare to slake our thirst. Besides, when the incline became more gentle, it would of course resume its peaceable course.
At this moment it reminded me of my worthy uncle, in his frequent fits of impatience and anger, while below it ran with the calmness of the Icelandic hunter.
On the 6th and 7th of July we kept following the spiral curves of this singular well, penetrating in actual distance no more than two leagues; but being carried to a depth of five leagues below the level of the sea.
But on the 8th, about noon, the fault took, towards the south-east, a much gentler slope, one of about forty-five degrees.
Then the road became monotonously easy.
It could not be otherwise, for there was no landscape to vary the stages of our journey.
On Wednesday, the 15th, we were seven leagues underground, and had travelled fifty leagues away from Snaefell.
Although we were tired, our health was perfect, and the medicine chest had not yet had occasion to be opened.
My uncle noted every hour the indications of the compass, the chronometer, the aneroid, and the thermometer the very same which he has published in his scientific report of our journey. It was therefore not difficult to know exactly our whereabouts.
When he told me that we had gone fifty leagues horizontally, I could not repress an exclamation of astonishment, at the thought that we had now long left Iceland behind us.
"What is the matter?"
he cried.
"I was reflecting that if your calculations are correct we are no longer under Iceland."
"Do you think so?"
"I am not mistaken," I said, and examining the map, I added, "We have passed Cape Portland, and those fifty leagues bring us under the wide expanse of ocean."
"Under the sea," my uncle repeated, rubbing his hands with delight.
"Can it be?"
I said.
"Is the ocean spread above our heads?"
"Of course, Axel.
What can be more natural?
At Newcastle are there not coal mines extending far under the sea?"
It was all very well for the Professor to call this so simple, but I could not feel quite easy at the thought that the boundless ocean was rolling over my head.
And yet it really mattered very little whether it was the plains and mountains that covered our heads, or the Atlantic waves, as long as we were arched over by solid granite.
And, besides, I was getting used to this idea; for the tunnel, now running straight, now winding as capriciously in its inclines as in its turnings, but constantly preserving its south-easterly direction, and always running deeper, was gradually carrying us to very great depths indeed.
Four days later, Saturday, the 18th of July, in the evening, we arrived at a kind of vast grotto; and here my uncle paid Hans his weekly wages, and it was settled that the next day, Sunday, should be a day of rest.
I therefore awoke next day relieved from the preoccupation of an immediate start. Although we were in the very deepest of known depths, there was something not unpleasant about it. And, besides, we were beginning to get accustomed to this troglodyte life.
I no longer thought of sun, moon, and stars, trees, houses, and towns, nor of any of those terrestrial superfluities which are necessaries of men who live upon the earth's surface.
Being fossils, we looked upon all those things as mere jokes.
The grotto was an immense apartment.
Along its granite floor ran our faithful stream.
At this distance from its spring the water was scarcely tepid, and we drank of it with pleasure.
After breakfast the Professor gave a few hours to the arrangement of his daily notes.
"First," said he, "I will make a calculation to ascertain our exact position.
I hope, after our return, to draw a map of our journey, which will be in reality a vertical section of the globe, containing the track of our expedition."
"That will be curious, uncle; but are your observations sufficiently accurate to enable you to do this correctly?"
"Yes; I have everywhere observed the angles and the inclines.
I am sure there is no error.
Let us see where we are now.
Take your compass, and note the direction."
I looked, and replied carefully:
"South-east by east."
"Well," answered the Professor, after a rapid calculation, "I infer that we have gone eighty-five leagues since we started."
"Therefore we are under mid-Atlantic?"
"To be sure we are."
"And perhaps at this very moment there is a storm above, and ships over our heads are being rudely tossed by the tempest."
"Quite probable."
"And whales are lashing the roof of our prison with their tails?"
"It may be, Axel, but they won't shake us here.
But let us go back to our calculation.
Here we are eighty-five leagues south-east of Snaefell, and I reckon that we are at a depth of sixteen leagues."
"Sixteen leagues?"
I cried.
"No doubt."
"Why, this is the very limit assigned by science to the thickness of the crust of the earth."
"I don't deny it."
"And here, according to the law of increasing temperature, there ought to be a heat of 2,732 deg.
Fahr.!"
"So there should, my lad."
"And all this solid granite ought to be running in fusion."
"You see that it is not so, and that, as so often happens, facts come to overthrow theories."
"I am obliged to agree; but, after all, it is surprising."
"What does the thermometer say?"
"Twenty-seven, six tenths (82 deg.
Fahr.)."
"Therefore the savants are wrong by 2,705 deg., and the proportional increase is a mistake.
Therefore Humphry Davy was right, and I am not wrong in following him.
What do you say now?"
"Nothing."
In truth, I had a good deal to say. I gave way in no respect to Davy's theory. I still held to the central heat, although I did not feel its effects.
I preferred to admit in truth, that this chimney of an extinct volcano, lined with lavas, which are non-conductors of heat, did not suffer the heat to pass through its walls.
But without stopping to look up new arguments I simply took up our situation such as it was.
"Well, admitting all your calculations to be quite correct, you must allow me to draw one rigid result therefrom."
"What is it.
Speak freely."
"At the latitude of Iceland, where we now are, the radius of the earth, the distance from the centre to the surface is about 1,583 leagues; let us say in round numbers 1,600 leagues, or 4,800 miles.
Out of 1,600 leagues we have gone twelve!"
"So you say."
"And these twelve at a cost of 85 leagues diagonally?"
"Exactly so."
"In twenty days?"
"Yes."
"Now, sixteen leagues are the hundredth part of the earth's radius.
At this rate we shall be two thousand days, or nearly five years and a half, in getting to the centre."
No answer was vouchsafed to this rational conclusion.
"Without reckoning, too, that if a vertical depth of sixteen leagues can be attained only by a diagonal descent of eighty-four, it follows that we must go eight thousand miles in a south-easterly direction; so that we shall emerge from some point in the earth's circumference instead of getting to the centre!"
"Confusion to all your figures, and all your hypotheses besides," shouted my uncle in a sudden rage. "What is the basis of them all? How do you know that this passage does not run straight to our destination? Besides, there is a precedent.
What one man has done, another may do."
"I hope so; but, still, I may be permitted - "
"You shall have my leave to hold your tongue, Axel, but not to talk in that irrational way."
I could see the awful Professor bursting through my uncle's skin, and I took timely warning.
"Now look at your aneroid.
What does that say?"
"It says we are under considerable pressure."
"Very good; so you see that by going gradually down, and getting accustomed to the density of the atmosphere, we don't suffer at all."
"Nothing, except a little pain in the ears."
"That's nothing, and you may get rid of even that by quick breathing whenever you feel the pain."
"Exactly so," I said, determined not to say a word that might cross my uncle's prejudices.
"There is even positive pleasure in living in this dense atmosphere.
Have you observed how intense sound is down here?"
"No doubt it is.
A deaf man would soon learn to hear perfectly."
"But won't this density augment?"
"Yes; according to a rather obscure law.
It is well known that the weight of bodies diminishes as fast as we descend.
You know that it is at the surface of the globe that weight is most sensibly felt, and that at the centre there is no weight at all."
"I am aware of that; but, tell me, will not air at last acquire the density of water?"
"Of course, under a pressure of seven hundred and ten atmospheres."
"And how, lower down still?"
"Lower down the density will still increase."
"But how shall we go down then."
"Why, we must fill our pockets with stones."
"Well, indeed, my worthy uncle, you are never at a loss for an answer."
I dared venture no farther into the region of probabilities, for I might presently have stumbled upon an impossibility, which would have brought the Professor on the scene when he was not wanted.
Still, it was evident that the air, under a pressure which might reach that of thousands of atmospheres, would at last reach the solid state, and then, even if our bodies could resist the strain, we should be stopped, and no reasonings would be able to get us on any farther.
But I did not advance this argument.
My uncle would have met it with his inevitable Saknussemm, a precedent which possessed no weight with me; for even if the journey of the learned Icelander were really attested, there was one very simple answer, that in the sixteenth century there was neither barometer or aneroid and therefore Saknussemm could not tell how far he had gone.
But I kept this objection to myself, and waited the course of events.
The rest of the day was passed in calculations and in conversations.
I remained a steadfast adherent of the opinions of Professor Liedenbrock, and I envied the stolid indifference of Hans, who, without going into causes and effects, went on with his eyes shut wherever his destiny guided him.
It must be confessed that hitherto things had not gone on so badly, and that I had small reason to complain. If our difficulties became no worse, we might hope to reach our end. And to what a height of scientific glory we should then attain!
I had become quite a Liedenbrock in my reasonings; seriously I had.
But would this state of things last in the strange place we had come to?
Perhaps it might.
For several days steeper inclines, some even frightfully near to the perpendicular, brought us deeper and deeper into the mass of the interior of the earth. Some days we advanced nearer to the centre by a league and a half, or nearly two leagues.
These were perilous descents, in which the skill and marvellous coolness of Hans were invaluable to us.
That unimpassioned Icelander devoted himself with incomprehensible deliberation; and, thanks to him, we crossed many a dangerous spot which we should never have cleared alone.
But his habit of silence gained upon him day by day, and was infecting us. External objects produce decided effects upon the brain. A man shut up between four walls soon loses the power to associate words and ideas together.
How many prisoners in solitary confinement become idiots, if not mad, for want of exercise for the thinking faculty!
During the fortnight following our last conversation, no incident occurred worthy of being recorded.
But I have good reason for remembering one very serious event which took place at this time, and of which I could scarcely now forget the smallest details.
By the 7th of August our successive descents had brought us to a depth of thirty leagues; that is, that for a space of thirty leagues there were over our heads solid beds of rock, ocean, continents, and towns.
We must have been two hundred leagues from Iceland.
On that day the tunnel went down a gentle slope.
I was ahead of the others.
My uncle was carrying one of Ruhmkorff's lamps and I the other.
I was examining the beds of granite.
Suddenly turning round I observed that I was alone.
Well, well, I thought; I have been going too fast, or Hans and my uncle have stopped on the way.
Come, this won't do; I must join them.
Fortunately there is not much of an ascent.
I retraced my steps.
I walked for a quarter of an hour.
I gazed into the darkness.
I shouted.
No reply: my voice was lost in the midst of the cavernous echoes which alone replied to my call.
I began to feel uneasy.
A shudder ran through me.
"Calmly!"
I said aloud to myself, "I am sure to find my companions again.
There are not two roads.
I was too far ahead.
I will return!"
For half an hour I climbed up. I listened for a call, and in that dense atmosphere a voice could reach very far. But there was a dreary silence in all that long gallery. I stopped. I could not believe that I was lost.
I was only bewildered for a time, not lost.
I was sure I should find my way again.
"Come," I repeated, "since there is but one road, and they are on it, I must find them again. I have but to ascend still. Unless, indeed, missing me, and supposing me to be behind, they too should have gone back.
But even in this case I have only to make the greater haste.
I shall find them, I am sure."
I repeated these words in the fainter tones of a half-convinced man.
Besides, to associate even such simple ideas with words, and reason with them, was a work of time.
A doubt then seized upon me. Was I indeed in advance when we became separated? Yes, to be sure I was. Hans was after me, preceding my uncle. He had even stopped for a while to strap his baggage better over his shoulders. I could remember this little incident.
It was at that very moment that I must have gone on.
Besides, I thought, have not I a guarantee that I shall not lose my way, a clue in the labyrinth, that cannot be broken, my faithful stream?
I have but to trace it back, and I must come upon them.
This conclusion revived my spirits, and I resolved to resume my march without loss of time.
How I then blessed my uncle's foresight in preventing the hunter from stopping up the hole in the granite.
This beneficent spring, after having satisfied our thirst on the road, would now be my guide among the windings of the terrestrial crust.
Before starting afresh I thought a wash would do me good.
I stooped to bathe my face in the Hansbach.
To my stupefaction and utter dismay my feet trod only - the rough dry granite.
The stream was no longer at my feet.
To describe my despair would be impossible.
No words could tell it.
I was buried alive, with the prospect before me of dying of hunger and thirst.
Mechanically I swept the ground with my hands.
How dry and hard the rock seemed to me!
But how had I left the course of the stream? For it was a terrible fact that it no longer ran at my side.
Then I understood the reason of that fearful, silence, when for the last time I listened to hear if any sound from my companions could reach my ears.
At the moment when I left the right road I had not noticed the absence of the stream.
It is evident that at that moment a deviation had presented itself before me, whilst the Hansbach, following the caprice of another incline, had gone with my companions away into unknown depths.
How was I to return?
There was not a trace of their footsteps or of my own, for the foot left no mark upon the granite floor.
I racked my brain for a solution of this impracticable problem.
One word described my position.
Lost!
Lost at an immeasurable depth!
Thirty leagues of rock seemed to weigh upon my shoulders with a dreadful pressure.
I felt crushed.
I tried to carry back my ideas to things on the surface of the earth. I could scarcely succeed. Hamburg, the house in the Koenigstrasse, my poor Graeuben, all that busy world underneath which I was wandering about, was passing in rapid confusion before my terrified memory.
I could revive with vivid reality all the incidents of our voyage, Iceland, M. Fridrikssen, Snaefell.
I said to myself that if, in such a position as I was now in, I was fool enough to cling to one glimpse of hope, it would be madness, and that the best thing I could do was to despair.
What human power could restore me to the light of the sun by rending asunder the huge arches of rock which united over my head, buttressing each other with impregnable strength?
Who could place my feet on the right path, and bring me back to my company?
"Oh, my uncle!"
burst from my lips in the tone of despair.
It was my only word of reproach, for I knew how much he must be suffering in seeking me, wherever he might be.
When I saw myself thus far removed from all earthly help I had recourse to heavenly succour.
The remembrance of my childhood, the recollection of my mother, whom I had only known in my tender early years, came back to me, and I knelt in prayer imploring for the Divine help of which I was so little worthy.
This return of trust in God's providence allayed the turbulence of my fears, and I was enabled to concentrate upon my situation all the force of my intelligence.
I had three days' provisions with me and my flask was full.
But I could not remain alone for long.
Should I go up or down?
Up, of course; up continually.
I must thus arrive at the point where I had left the stream, that fatal turn in the road.
With the stream at my feet, I might hope to regain the summit of Snaefell.
Why had I not thought of that sooner? Here was evidently a chance of safety. The most pressing duty was to find out again the course of the Hansbach. I rose, and leaning upon my iron-pointed stick I ascended the gallery. The slope was rather steep.
I walked on without hope but without indecision, like a man who has made up his mind.
For half an hour I met with no obstacle. I tried to recognise my way by the form of the tunnel, by the projections of certain rocks, by the disposition of the fractures.
But no particular sign appeared, and I soon saw that this gallery could not bring me back to the turning point.
It came to an abrupt end.
I struck against an impenetrable wall, and fell down upon the rock.
Unspeakable despair then seized upon me.
I lay overwhelmed, aghast!
My last hope was shattered against this granite wall.
Lost in this labyrinth, whose windings crossed each other in all directions, it was no use to think of flight any longer. Here I must die the most dreadful of deaths.
And, strange to say, the thought came across me that when some day my petrified remains should be found thirty leagues below the surface in the bowels of the earth, the discovery might lead to grave scientific discussions.
I tried to speak aloud, but hoarse sounds alone passed my dry lips.
I panted for breath.
In the midst of my agony a new terror laid hold of me.
In falling my lamp had got wrong.
I could not set it right, and its light was paling and would soon disappear altogether.
I gazed painfully upon the luminous current growing weaker and weaker in the wire coil. A dim procession of moving shadows seemed slowly unfolding down the darkening walls. I scarcely dared to shut my eyes for one moment, for fear of losing the least glimmer of this precious light.
Every instant it seemed about to vanish and the dense blackness to come rolling in palpably upon me.
One last trembling glimmer shot feebly up.
I watched it in trembling and anxiety; I drank it in as if I could preserve it, concentrating upon it the full power of my eyes, as upon the very last sensation of light which they were ever to experience, and the next moment I lay in the heavy gloom of deep, thick, unfathomable darkness.
A terrible cry of anguish burst from me. Upon earth, in the midst of the darkest night, light never abdicates its functions altogether. It is still subtle and diffusive, but whatever little there may be, the eye still catches that little.
Here there was not an atom; the total darkness made me totally blind.
Then I began to lose my head. I arose with my arms stretched out before me, attempting painfully to feel my way.
I began to run wildly, hurrying through the inextricable maze, still descending, still running through the substance of the earth's thick crust, a struggling denizen of geological 'faults,' crying, shouting, yelling, soon bruised by contact with the jagged rock, falling and rising again bleeding, trying to drink the blood which covered my face, and even waiting for some rock to shatter my skull against.
I shall never know whither my mad career took me.
After the lapse of some hours, no doubt exhausted, I fell like a lifeless lump at the foot of the wall, and lost all consciousness.
When I returned to partial life my face was wet with tears.
How long that state of insensibility had lasted I cannot say.
I had no means now of taking account of time.
Never was solitude equal to this, never had any living being been so utterly forsaken.
After my fall I had lost a good deal of blood. I felt it flowing over me. Ah! how happy I should have been could I have died, and if death were not yet to be gone through. I would think no longer.
I drove away every idea, and, conquered by my grief, I rolled myself to the foot of the opposite wall.
Already I was feeling the approach of another faint, and was hoping for complete annihilation, when a loud noise reached me.
It was like the distant rumble of continuous thunder, and I could hear its sounding undulations rolling far away into the remote recesses of the abyss.
Whence could this noise proceed?
It must be from some phenomenon proceeding in the great depths amidst which I lay helpless.
Was it an explosion of gas?
Was it the fall of some mighty pillar of the globe?
I listened still.
I wanted to know if the noise would be repeated.
A quarter of an hour passed away.
Silence reigned in this gallery.
I could not hear even the beating of my heart.
Suddenly my ear, resting by chance against the wall, caught, or seemed to catch, certain vague, indescribable, distant, articulate sounds, as of words.
"This is a delusion," I thought.
But it was not.
Listening more attentively, I heard in reality a murmuring of voices.
But my weakness prevented me from understanding what the voices said.
Yet it was language, I was sure of it.
For a moment I feared the words might be my own, brought back by the echo.
Perhaps I had been crying out unknown to myself.
I closed my lips firmly, and laid my ear against the wall again.
"Yes, truly, some one is speaking; those are words!"
Even a few feet from the wall I could hear distinctly.
I succeeded in catching uncertain, strange, undistinguishable words.
They came as if pronounced in low murmured whispers.
The word 'forlorad' was several times repeated in a tone of sympathy and sorrow.
"Help!"
I cried with all my might.
"Help!"
I listened, I watched in the darkness for an answer, a cry, a mere breath of sound, but nothing came.
Some minutes passed.
A whole world of ideas had opened in my mind.
I thought that my weakened voice could never penetrate to my companions.
"It is they," I repeated.
"What other men can be thirty leagues under ground?"
I again began to listen.
Passing my ear over the wall from one place to another, I found the point where the voices seemed to be best heard.
The word 'forlorad' again returned; then the rolling of thunder which had roused me from my lethargy.
"No," I said, "no; it is not through such a mass that a voice can be heard.
I am surrounded by granite walls, and the loudest explosion could never be heard here!
This noise comes along the gallery.
There must be here some remarkable exercise of acoustic laws!"
I listened again, and this time, yes this time, I did distinctly hear my name pronounced across the wide interval.
It was my uncle's own voice!
He was talking to the guide.
And 'forlorad' is a Danish word.
Then I understood it all.
To make myself heard, I must speak along this wall, which would conduct the sound of my voice just as wire conducts electricity.
But there was no time to lose.
If my companions moved but a few steps away, the acoustic phenomenon would cease.
I therefore approached the wall, and pronounced these words as clearly as possible:
"Uncle Liedenbrock!"
I waited with the deepest anxiety.
Sound does not travel with great velocity.
Even increased density air has no effect upon its rate of travelling; it merely augments its intensity.
Seconds, which seemed ages, passed away, and at last these words reached me:
"Axel!
Axel!
is it you?"
"Yes, yes," I replied.
"My boy, where are you?"
"Lost, in the deepest darkness."
"Where is your lamp?"
"It is out."
"And the stream?"
"Disappeared."
"Axel, Axel, take courage!"
"Wait!
I am exhausted!
I can't answer.
Speak to me!"
"Courage," resumed my uncle. "Don't speak. Listen to me. We have looked for you up the gallery and down the gallery. Could not find you. I wept for you, my poor boy. At last, supposing you were still on the Hansbach, we fired our guns.
Our voices are audible to each other, but our hands cannot touch.
But don't despair, Axel!
It is a great thing that we can hear each other."
During this time I had been reflecting.
A vague hope was returning to my heart.
There was one thing I must know to begin with.
I placed my lips close to the wall, saying:
"My uncle!"
"My boy!"
came to me after a few seconds.
"We must know how far we are apart."
"That is easy."
"You have your chronometer?"
"Yes."
"Well, take it.
Pronounce my name, noting exactly the second when you speak.
I will repeat it as soon as it shall come to me, and you will observe the exact moment when you get my answer."
"Yes; and half the time between my call and your answer will exactly indicate that which my voice will take in coming to you."
"Just so, my uncle."
"Are you ready?"
"Yes."
"Now, attention.
I am going to call your name."
I put my ear to the wall, and as soon as the name 'Axel' came I immediately replied "Axel," then waited.
"Forty seconds," said my uncle.
"Forty seconds between the two words; so the sound takes twenty seconds in coming.
Now, at the rate of 1,120 feet in a second, this is 22,400 feet, or four miles and a quarter, nearly."
"Four miles and a quarter!"
I murmured.
"It will soon be over, Axel."
"Must I go up or down?"
"Down - for this reason: We are in a vast chamber, with endless galleries. Yours must lead into it, for it seems as if all the clefts and fractures of the globe radiated round this vast cavern. So get up, and begin walking.
Walk on, drag yourself along, if necessary slide down the steep places, and at the end you will find us ready to receive you.
Now begin moving."
These words cheered me up.
"Good bye, uncle."
I cried.
"I am going.
There will be no more voices heard when once I have started.
So good bye!"
"Good bye, Axel, au revoir!"
These were the last words I heard.
This wonderful underground conversation, carried on with a distance of four miles and a quarter between us, concluded with these words of hope.
I thanked God from my heart, for it was He who had conducted me through those vast solitudes to the point where, alone of all others perhaps, the voices of my companions could have reached me.
This acoustic effect is easily explained on scientific grounds. It arose from the concave form of the gallery and the conducting power of the rock. There are many examples of this propagation of sounds which remain unheard in the intermediate space.
I remember that a similar phenomenon has been observed in many places; amongst others on the internal surface of the gallery of the dome of St. Paul's in London, and especially in the midst of the curious caverns among the quarries near Syracuse, the most wonderful of which is called Dionysius' Ear.
These remembrances came into my mind, and I clearly saw that since my uncle's voice really reached me, there could be no obstacle between us.
Following the direction by which the sound came, of course I should arrive in his presence, if my strength did not fail me.
I therefore rose; I rather dragged myself than walked.
The slope was rapid, and I slid down.
Soon the swiftness of the descent increased horribly, and threatened to become a fall.
I no longer had the strength to stop myself.
Suddenly there was no ground under me.
I felt myself revolving in air, striking and rebounding against the craggy projections of a vertical gallery, quite a well; my head struck against a sharp corner of the rock, and I became unconscious.
When I came to myself, I was stretched in half darkness, covered with thick coats and blankets.
My uncle was watching over me, to discover the least sign of life.
At my first sigh he took my hand; when I opened my eyes he uttered a cry of joy.
"He lives!
he lives!"
he cried.
"Yes, I am still alive," I answered feebly.
"My dear nephew," said my uncle, pressing me to his breast, "you are saved."
I was deeply touched with the tenderness of his manner as he uttered these words, and still more with the care with which he watched over me.
But such trials were wanted to bring out the Professor's tenderer qualities.
At this moment Hans came, he saw my hand in my uncle's, and I may safely say that there was joy in his countenance.
"God dag," said he.
"How do you do, Hans?
How are you?
And now, uncle, tell me where we are at the present moment?"
"To-morrow, Axel, to-morrow.
Now you are too faint and weak.
I have bandaged your head with compresses which must not be disturbed.
Sleep now, and to-morrow I will tell you all."
"But do tell me what time it is, and what day."
"It is Sunday, the 8th of August, and it is ten at night.
You must ask me no more questions until the 10th."
In truth I was very weak, and my eyes involuntarily closed.
I wanted a good night's rest; and I therefore went off to sleep, with the knowledge that I had been four long days alone in the heart of the earth.
Next morning, on awakening, I looked round me. My couch, made up of all our travelling gear, was in a charming grotto, adorned with splendid stalactites, and the soil of which was a fine sand. It was half light.
There was no torch, no lamp, yet certain mysterious glimpses of light came from without through a narrow opening in the grotto.
I heard too a vague and indistinct noise, something like the murmuring of waves breaking upon a shingly shore, and at times I seemed to hear the whistling of wind.
I wondered whether I was awake, whether I was dreaming, whether my brain, crazed by my fall, was not affected by imaginary noises.
Yet neither eyes, nor ears could be so utterly deceived.
It is a ray of daylight, I thought, sliding in through this cleft in the rock! That is indeed the murmuring of waves! That is the rustling noise of wind. Am I quite mistaken, or have we returned to the surface of the earth?
Has my uncle given up the expedition, or is it happily terminated?
I was asking myself these unanswerable questions when the Professor entered.
"Good morning, Axel," he cried cheerily.
"I feel sure you are better."
"Yes, I am indeed," said I, sitting up on my couch.
"You can hardly fail to be better, for you have slept quietly.
Hans and I watched you by turns, and we have noticed you were evidently recovering."
"Indeed, I do feel a great deal better, and I will give you a proof of that presently if you will let me have my breakfast."
"You shall eat, lad.
The fever has left you.
Hans rubbed your wounds with some ointment or other of which the Icelanders keep the secret, and they have healed marvellously.
Our hunter is a splendid fellow!"
Whilst he went on talking, my uncle prepared a few provisions, which I devoured eagerly, notwithstanding his advice to the contrary.
All the while I was overwhelming him with questions which he answered readily.
I then learnt that my providential fall had brought me exactly to the extremity of an almost perpendicular shaft; and as I had landed in the midst of an accompanying torrent of stones, the least of which would have been enough to crush me, the conclusion was that a loose portion of the rock had come down with me.
This frightful conveyance had thus carried me into the arms of my uncle, where I fell bruised, bleeding, and insensible.
"Truly it is wonderful that you have not been killed a hundred times over.
But, for the love of God, don't let us ever separate again, or we many never see each other more."
"Not separate!
Is the journey not over, then?"
I opened a pair of astonished eyes, which immediately called for the question:
"What is the matter, Axel?"
"I have a question to ask you.
You say that I am safe and sound?"
"No doubt you are."
"And all my limbs unbroken?"
"Certainly."
"And my head?"
"Your head, except for a few bruises, is all right; and it is on your shoulders, where it ought to be."
"Well, I am afraid my brain is affected."
"Your mind affected!"
"Yes, I fear so.
Are we again on the surface of the globe?"
"No, certainly not."
"Then I must be mad; for don't I see the light of day, and don't I hear the wind blowing, and the sea breaking on the shore?"
"Ah!
is that all?"
"Do tell me all about it."
"I can't explain the inexplicable, but you will soon see and understand that geology has not yet learnt all it has to learn."
"Then let us go," I answered quickly.
"No, Axel; the open air might be bad for you."
"Open air?"
"Yes; the wind is rather strong.
You must not expose yourself."
"But I assure you I am perfectly well."
"A little patience, my nephew.
A relapse might get us into trouble, and we have no time to lose, for the voyage may be a long one."
"The voyage!"
"Yes, rest to-day, and to-morrow we will set sail."
"Set sail!"
- and I almost leaped up.
What did it all mean?
Had we a river, a lake, a sea to depend upon?
Was there a ship at our disposal in some underground harbour?
My curiosity was highly excited, my uncle vainly tried to restrain me.
When he saw that my impatience was doing me harm, he yielded.
I dressed in haste.
For greater safety I wrapped myself in a blanket, and came out of the grotto.
At first I could hardly see anything.
My eyes, unaccustomed to the light, quickly closed.
When I was able to reopen them, I stood more stupefied even than surprised.
"The sea!"
I cried.
"Yes," my uncle replied, "the Liedenbrock Sea; and I don't suppose any other discoverer will ever dispute my claim to name it after myself as its first discoverer."
A vast sheet of water, the commencement of a lake or an ocean, spread far away beyond the range of the eye, reminding me forcibly of that open sea which drew from Xenophon's ten thousand Greeks, after their long retreat, the simultaneous cry, "Thalatta! thalatta!" the sea! the sea!
The deeply indented shore was lined with a breadth of fine shining sand, softly lapped by the waves, and strewn with the small shells which had been inhabited by the first of created beings.
The waves broke on this shore with the hollow echoing murmur peculiar to vast inclosed spaces.
A light foam flew over the waves before the breath of a moderate breeze, and some of the spray fell upon my face.
On this slightly inclining shore, about a hundred fathoms from the limit of the waves, came down the foot of a huge wall of vast cliffs, which rose majestically to an enormous height.
Some of these, dividing the beach with their sharp spurs, formed capes and promontories, worn away by the ceaseless action of the surf.
Farther on the eye discerned their massive outline sharply defined against the hazy distant horizon.
It was quite an ocean, with the irregular shores of earth, but desert and frightfully wild in appearance.
If my eyes were able to range afar over this great sea, it was because a peculiar light brought to view every detail of it.
It was not the light of the sun, with his dazzling shafts of brightness and the splendour of his rays; nor was it the pale and uncertain shimmer of the moonbeams, the dim reflection of a nobler body of light.
No; the illuminating power of this light, its trembling diffusiveness, its bright, clear whiteness, and its low temperature, showed that it must be of electric origin.
It was like an aurora borealis, a continuous cosmical phenomenon, filling a cavern of sufficient extent to contain an ocean.
The vault that spanned the space above, the sky, if it could be called so, seemed composed of vast plains of cloud, shifting and variable vapours, which by their condensation must at certain times fall in torrents of rain.
I should have thought that under so powerful a pressure of the atmosphere there could be no evaporation; and yet, under a law unknown to me, there were broad tracts of vapour suspended in the air.
But then 'the weather was fine.'
The play of the electric light produced singular effects upon the upper strata of cloud.
Deep shadows reposed upon their lower wreaths; and often, between two separated fields of cloud, there glided down a ray of unspeakable lustre.
But it was not solar light, and there was no heat.
The general effect was sad, supremely melancholy.
Instead of the shining firmament, spangled with its innumerable stars, shining singly or in clusters, I felt that all these subdued and shaded lights were ribbed in by vast walls of granite, which seemed to overpower me with their weight, and that all this space, great as it was, would not be enough for the march of the humblest of satellites.
Then I remembered the theory of an English captain, who likened the earth to a vast hollow sphere, in the interior of which the air became luminous because of the vast pressure that weighed upon it; while two stars, Pluto and Proserpine, rolled within upon the circuit of their mysterious orbits.
We were in reality shut up inside an immeasurable excavation. Its width could not be estimated, since the shore ran widening as far as eye could reach, nor could its length, for the dim horizon bounded the new. As for its height, it must have been several leagues.
Where this vault rested upon its granite base no eye could tell; but there was a cloud hanging far above, the height of which we estimated at 12,000 feet, a greater height than that of any terrestrial vapour, and no doubt due to the great density of the air.
The word cavern does not convey any idea of this immense space; words of human tongue are inadequate to describe the discoveries of him who ventures into the deep abysses of earth.
Besides I could not tell upon what geological theory to account for the existence of such an excavation.
Had the cooling of the globe produced it?
I knew of celebrated caverns from the descriptions of travellers, but had never heard of any of such dimensions as this.
If the grotto of Guachara, in Colombia, visited by Humboldt, had not given up the whole of the secret of its depth to the philosopher, who investigated it to the depth of 2,500 feet, it probably did not extend much farther.
The immense mammoth cave in Kentucky is of gigantic proportions, since its vaulted roof rises five hundred feet [1] above the level of an unfathomable lake and travellers have explored its ramifications to the extent of forty miles.
But what were these cavities compared to that in which I stood with wonder and admiration, with its sky of luminous vapours, its bursts of electric light, and a vast sea filling its bed?
My imagination fell powerless before such immensity.
I gazed upon these wonders in silence. Words failed me to express my feelings. I felt as if I was in some distant planet Uranus or Neptune - and in the presence of phenomena of which my terrestrial experience gave me no cognisance.
For such novel sensations, new words were wanted; and my imagination failed to supply them.
I gazed, I thought, I admired, with a stupefaction mingled with a certain amount of fear.
The unforeseen nature of this spectacle brought back the colour to my cheeks.
I was under a new course of treatment with the aid of astonishment, and my convalescence was promoted by this novel system of therapeutics; besides, the dense and breezy air invigorated me, supplying more oxygen to my lungs.
It will be easily conceived that after an imprisonment of forty seven days in a narrow gallery it was the height of physical enjoyment to breathe a moist air impregnated with saline particles.
I was delighted to leave my dark grotto.
My uncle, already familiar with these wonders, had ceased to feel surprise.
"You feel strong enough to walk a little way now?"
he asked.
"Yes, certainly; and nothing could be more delightful."
"Well, take my arm, Axel, and let us follow the windings of the shore."
I eagerly accepted, and we began to coast along this new sea. On the left huge pyramids of rock, piled one upon another, produced a prodigious titanic effect. Down their sides flowed numberless waterfalls, which went on their way in brawling but pellucid streams.
A few light vapours, leaping from rock to rock, denoted the place of hot springs; and streams flowed softly down to the common basin, gliding down the gentle slopes with a softer murmur.
Amongst these streams I recognised our faithful travelling companion, the Hansbach, coming to lose its little volume quietly in the mighty sea, just as if it had done nothing else since the beginning of the world.
"We shall see it no more," I said, with a sigh.
"What matters," replied the philosopher, "whether this or another serves to guide us?"
I thought him rather ungrateful.
But at that moment my attention was drawn to an unexpected sight. At a distance of five hundred paces, at the turn of a high promontory, appeared a high, tufted, dense forest. It was composed of trees of moderate height, formed like umbrellas, with exact geometrical outlines.
The currents of wind seemed to have had no effect upon their shape, and in the midst of the windy blasts they stood unmoved and firm, just like a clump of petrified cedars.
I hastened forward. I could not give any name to these singular creations. Were they some of the two hundred thousand species of vegetables known hitherto, and did they claim a place of their own in the lacustrine flora?
No; when we arrived under their shade my surprise turned into admiration.
There stood before me productions of earth, but of gigantic stature, which my uncle immediately named.
"It is only a forest of mushrooms," said he.
And he was right. Imagine the large development attained by these plants, which prefer a warm, moist climate.
I knew that the Lycopodon giganteum attains, according to Bulliard, a circumference of eight or nine feet; but here were pale mushrooms, thirty to forty feet high, and crowned with a cap of equal diameter.
There they stood in thousands.
No light could penetrate between their huge cones, and complete darkness reigned beneath those giants; they formed settlements of domes placed in close array like the round, thatched roofs of a central African city.
Yet I wanted to penetrate farther underneath, though a chill fell upon me as soon as I came under those cellular vaults.
For half an hour we wandered from side to side in the damp shades, and it was a comfortable and pleasant change to arrive once more upon the sea shore.
But the subterranean vegetation was not confined to these fungi. Farther on rose groups of tall trees of colourless foliage and easy to recognise.
They were lowly shrubs of earth, here attaining gigantic size; lycopodiums, a hundred feet high; the huge sigillaria, found in our coal mines; tree ferns, as tall as our fir-trees in northern latitudes; lepidodendra, with cylindrical forked stems, terminated by long leaves, and bristling with rough hairs like those of the cactus.
"Wonderful, magnificent, splendid!"
cried my uncle.
"Here is the entire flora of the second period of the world - the transition period.
These, humble garden plants with us, were tall trees in the early ages.
Look, Axel, and admire it all.
Never had botanist such a feast as this!"
"You are right, my uncle.
Providence seems to have preserved in this immense conservatory the antediluvian plants which the wisdom of philosophers has so sagaciously put together again."
"It is a conservatory, Axel; but is it not also a menagerie?"
"Surely not a menagerie!"
"Yes; no doubt of it.
Look at that dust under your feet; see the bones scattered on the ground."
"So there are!"
I cried; "bones of extinct animals."
I had rushed upon these remains, formed of indestructible phosphates of lime, and without hesitation I named these monstrous bones, which lay scattered about like decayed trunks of trees.
"Here is the lower jaw of a mastodon," [1] I said. "These are the molar teeth of the deinotherium; this femur must have belonged to the greatest of those beasts, the megatherium. It certainly is a menagerie, for these remains were not brought here by a deluge.
The animals to which they belonged roamed on the shores of this subterranean sea, under the shade of those arborescent trees.
Here are entire skeletons.
And yet I cannot understand the appearance of these quadrupeds in a granite cavern."
"Why?"
"Because animal life existed upon the earth only in the secondary period, when a sediment of soil had been deposited by the rivers, and taken the place of the incandescent rocks of the primitive period."
"Well, Axel, there is a very simple answer to your objection that this soil is alluvial."
"What!
at such a depth below the surface of the earth?"
"No doubt; and there is a geological explanation of the fact. At a certain period the earth consisted only of an elastic crust or bark, alternately acted on by forces from above or below, according to the laws of attraction and gravitation.
Probably there were subsidences of the outer crust, when a portion of the sedimentary deposits was carried down sudden openings."
"That may be," I replied; "but if there have been creatures now extinct in these underground regions, why may not some of those monsters be now roaming through these gloomy forests, or hidden behind the steep crags?"
And as this unpleasant notion got hold of me, I surveyed with anxious scrutiny the open spaces before me; but no living creature appeared upon the barren strand.
I felt rather tired, and went to sit down at the end of a promontory, at the foot of which the waves came and beat themselves into spray.
Thence my eye could sweep every part of the bay; within its extremity a little harbour was formed between the pyramidal cliffs, where the still waters slept untouched by the boisterous winds.
A brig and two or three schooners might have moored within it in safety.
I almost fancied I should presently see some ship issue from it, full sail, and take to the open sea under the southern breeze.
But this illusion lasted a very short time. We were the only living creatures in this subterranean world. When the wind lulled, a deeper silence than that of the deserts fell upon the arid, naked rocks, and weighed upon the surface of the ocean.
I then desired to pierce the distant haze, and to rend asunder the mysterious curtain that hung across the horizon.
Anxious queries arose to my lips.
Where did that sea terminate?
Where did it lead to?
Should we ever know anything about its opposite shores?
My uncle made no doubt about it at all; I both desired and feared.
After spending an hour in the contemplation of this marvellous spectacle, we returned to the shore to regain the grotto, and I fell asleep in the midst of the strangest thoughts.
The next morning I awoke feeling perfectly well.
I thought a bathe would do me good, and I went to plunge for a few minutes into the waters of this mediterranean sea, for assuredly it better deserved this name than any other sea.
I came back to breakfast with a good appetite. Hans was a good caterer for our little household; he had water and fire at his disposal, so that he was able to vary our bill of fare now and then.
For dessert he gave us a few cups of coffee, and never was coffee so delicious.
"Now," said my uncle, "now is the time for high tide, and we must not lose the opportunity to study this phenomenon."
"What!
the tide!"
I cried.
"Can the influence of the sun and moon be felt down here?"
"Why not?
Are not all bodies subject throughout their mass to the power of universal attraction?
This mass of water cannot escape the general law.
And in spite of the heavy atmospheric pressure on the surface, you will see it rise like the Atlantic itself."
At the same moment we reached the sand on the shore, and the waves were by slow degrees encroaching on the shore.
"Here is the tide rising," I cried.
"Yes, Axel; and judging by these ridges of foam, you may observe that the sea will rise about twelve feet."
"This is wonderful," I said.
"No; it is quite natural."
"You may say so, uncle; but to me it is most extraordinary, and I can hardly believe my eyes.
Who would ever have imagined, under this terrestrial crust, an ocean with ebbing and flowing tides, with winds and storms?"
"Well," replied my uncle, "is there any scientific reason against it?"
"No; I see none, as soon as the theory of central heat is given up."
"So then, thus far," he answered, "the theory of Sir Humphry Davy is confirmed."
"Evidently it is; and now there is no reason why there should not be seas and continents in the interior of the earth."
"No doubt," said my uncle; "and inhabited too."
"To be sure," said I; "and why should not these waters yield to us fishes of unknown species?"
"At any rate," he replied, "we have not seen any yet."
"Well, let us make some lines, and see if the bait will draw here as it does in sublunary regions."
"We will try, Axel, for we must penetrate all secrets of these newly discovered regions."
"But where are we, uncle?
for I have not yet asked you that question, and your instruments must be able to furnish the answer."
"Horizontally, three hundred and fifty leagues from Iceland."
"So much as that?"
"I am sure of not being a mile out of my reckoning."
"And does the compass still show south-east?"
"Yes; with a westerly deviation of nineteen degrees forty-five minutes, just as above ground.
As for its dip, a curious fact is coming to light, which I have observed carefully: that the needle, instead of dipping towards the pole as in the northern hemisphere, on the contrary, rises from it."
"Would you then conclude," I said, "that the magnetic pole is somewhere between the surface of the globe and the point where we are?"
"Exactly so; and it is likely enough that if we were to reach the spot beneath the polar regions, about that seventy-first degree where Sir James Ross has discovered the magnetic pole to be situated, we should see the needle point straight up.
Therefore that mysterious centre of attraction is at no great depth."
I remarked: "It is so; and here is a fact which science has scarcely suspected."
"Science, my lad, has been built upon many errors; but they are errors which it was good to fall into, for they led to the truth."
"What depth have we now reached?"
"We are thirty-five leagues below the surface."
"So," I said, examining the map, "the Highlands of Scotland are over our heads, and the Grampians are raising their rugged summits above us."
"Yes," answered the Professor laughing. "It is rather a heavy weight to bear, but a solid arch spans over our heads. The great Architect has built it of the best materials; and never could man have given it so wide a stretch.
What are the finest arches of bridges and the arcades of cathedrals, compared with this far reaching vault, with a radius of three leagues, beneath which a wide and tempest-tossed ocean may flow at its ease?"
"Oh, I am not afraid that it will fall down upon my head.
But now what are your plans?
Are you not thinking of returning to the surface now?"
"Return!
no, indeed!
We will continue our journey, everything having gone on well so far."
"But how are we to get down below this liquid surface?"
"Oh, I am not going to dive head foremost.
But if all oceans are properly speaking but lakes, since they are encompassed by land, of course this internal sea will be surrounded by a coast of granite, and on the opposite shores we shall find fresh passages opening."
"How long do you suppose this sea to be?"
"Thirty or forty leagues; so that we have no time to lose, and we shall set sail to-morrow."
I looked about for a ship.
"Set sail, shall we?
But I should like to see my boat first."
"It will not be a boat at all, but a good, well-made raft."
"Why," I said, "a raft would be just as hard to make as a boat, and I don't see - "
"I know you don't see; but you might hear if you would listen.
Don't you hear the hammer at work?
Hans is already busy at it."
"What, has he already felled the trees?"
"Oh, the trees were already down.
Come, and you will see for yourself."
After half an hour's walking, on the other side of the promontory which formed the little natural harbour, I perceived Hans at work. In a few more steps I was at his side.
To my great surprise a half-finished raft was already lying on the sand, made of a peculiar kind of wood, and a great number of planks, straight and bent, and of frames, were covering the ground, enough almost for a little fleet.
"Uncle, what wood is this?"
I cried.
"It is fir, pine, or birch, and other northern coniferae, mineralised by the action of the sea.
It is called surturbrand, a variety of brown coal or lignite, found chiefly in Iceland."
"But surely, then, like other fossil wood, it must be as hard as stone, and cannot float?"
"Sometimes that may happen; some of these woods become true anthracites; but others, such as this, have only gone through the first stage of fossil transformation.
Just look," added my uncle, throwing into the sea one of those precious waifs.
The bit of wood, after disappearing, returned to the surface and oscillated to and fro with the waves.
"Are you convinced?"
said my uncle.
"I am quite convinced, although it is incredible!"
By next evening, thanks to the industry and skill of our guide, the raft was made.
It was ten feet by five; the planks of surturbrand, braced strongly together with cords, presented an even surface, and when launched this improvised vessel floated easily upon the waves of the Liedenbrock Sea.
On the 13th of August we awoke early.
We were now to begin to adopt a mode of travelling both more expeditious and less fatiguing than hitherto.
A mast was made of two poles spliced together, a yard was made of a third, a blanket borrowed from our coverings made a tolerable sail.
There was no want of cordage for the rigging, and everything was well and firmly made.
The provisions, the baggage, the instruments, the guns, and a good quantity of fresh water from the rocks around, all found their proper places on board; and at six the Professor gave the signal to embark. Hans had fitted up a rudder to steer his vessel.
He took the tiller, and unmoored; the sail was set, and we were soon afloat.
At the moment of leaving the harbour, my uncle, who was tenaciously fond of naming his new discoveries, wanted to give it a name, and proposed mine amongst others.
"But I have a better to propose," I said: "Grauben.
Let it be called Port Graeuben; it will look very well upon the map."
"Port Graeuben let it be then."
And so the cherished remembrance of my Virlandaise became associated with our adventurous expedition.
The wind was from the north-west.
We went with it at a high rate of speed.
The dense atmosphere acted with great force and impelled us swiftly on.
In an hour my uncle had been able to estimate our progress.
At this rate, he said, we shall make thirty leagues in twenty-four hours, and we shall soon come in sight of the opposite shore.
I made no answer, but went and sat forward. The northern shore was already beginning to dip under the horizon. The eastern and western strands spread wide as if to bid us farewell.
Before our eyes lay far and wide a vast sea; shadows of great clouds swept heavily over its silver-grey surface; the glistening bluish rays of electric light, here and there reflected by the dancing drops of spray, shot out little sheaves of light from the track we left in our rear.
Soon we entirely lost sight of land; no object was left for the eye to judge by, and but for the frothy track of the raft, I might have thought we were standing still.
About twelve, immense shoals of seaweeds came in sight.
I was aware of the great powers of vegetation that characterise these plants, which grow at a depth of twelve thousand feet, reproduce themselves under a pressure of four hundred atmospheres, and sometimes form barriers strong enough to impede the course of a ship.
But never, I think, were such seaweeds as those which we saw floating in immense waving lines upon the sea of Liedenbrock.
Our raft skirted the whole length of the fuci, three or four thousand feet long, undulating like vast serpents beyond the reach of sight; I found some amusement in tracing these endless waves, always thinking I should come to the end of them, and for hours my patience was vying with my surprise.
What natural force could have produced such plants, and what must have been the appearance of the earth in the first ages of its formation, when, under the action of heat and moisture, the vegetable kingdom alone was developing on its surface?
Evening came, and, as on the previous day, I perceived no change in the luminous condition of the air.
It was a constant condition, the permanency of which might be relied upon.
After supper I laid myself down at the foot of the mast, and fell asleep in the midst of fantastic reveries.
Hans, keeping fast by the helm, let the raft run on, which, after all, needed no steering, the wind blowing directly aft.
Since our departure from Port Graeuben, Professor Liedenbrock had entrusted the log to my care; I was to register every observation, make entries of interesting phenomena, the direction of the wind, the rate of sailing, the way we made - in a word, every particular of our singular voyage.
I shall therefore reproduce here these daily notes, written, so to speak, as the course of events directed, in order to furnish an exact narrative of our passage.
Friday, August 14. - Wind steady, N.W. The raft makes rapid way in a direct line. Coast thirty leagues to leeward. Nothing in sight before us. Intensity of light the same.
Weather fine; that is to say, that the clouds are flying high, are light, and bathed in a white atmosphere resembling silver in a state of fusion.
Therm.
89 deg.
Fahr.
At noon Hans prepared a hook at the end of a line. He baited it with a small piece of meat and flung it into the sea. For two hours nothing was caught. Are these waters, then, bare of inhabitants? No, there's a pull at the line.
Hans draws it in and brings out a struggling fish.
"A sturgeon," I cried; "a small sturgeon."
The Professor eyes the creature attentively, and his opinion differs from mine.
The head of this fish was flat, but rounded in front, and the anterior part of its body was plated with bony, angular scales; it had no teeth, its pectoral fins were large, and of tail there was none.
The animal belonged to the same order as the sturgeon, but differed from that fish in many essential particulars.
After a short examination my uncle pronounced his opinion.
"This fish belongs to an extinct family, of which only fossil traces are found in the devonian formations."
"What!"
I cried.
"Have we taken alive an inhabitant of the seas of primitive ages?"
"Yes; and you will observe that these fossil fishes have no identity with any living species.
To have in one's possession a living specimen is a happy event for a naturalist."
"But to what family does it belong?"
"It is of the order of ganoids, of the family of the cephalaspidae; and a species of pterichthys.
But this one displays a peculiarity confined to all fishes that inhabit subterranean waters.
It is blind, and not only blind, but actually has no eyes at all."
I looked: nothing could be more certain. But supposing it might be a solitary case, we baited afresh, and threw out our line.
Surely this ocean is well peopled with fish, for in another couple of hours we took a large quantity of pterichthydes, as well as of others belonging to the extinct family of the dipterides, but of which my uncle could not tell the species; none had organs of sight.
This unhoped-for catch recruited our stock of provisions.
Thus it is evident that this sea contains none but species known to us in their fossil state, in which fishes as well as reptiles are the less perfectly and completely organised the farther back their date of creation.
Perhaps we may yet meet with some of those saurians which science has reconstructed out of a bit of bone or cartilage.
I took up the telescope and scanned the whole horizon, and found it everywhere a desert sea.
We are far away removed from the shores.
I gaze upward in the air. Why should not some of the strange birds restored by the immortal Cuvier again flap their 'sail-broad vans' in this dense and heavy atmosphere? There are sufficient fish for their support.
I survey the whole space that stretches overhead; it is as desert as the shore was.
Still my imagination carried me away amongst the wonderful speculations of palaeontology. Though awake I fell into a dream. I thought I could see floating on the surface of the waters enormous chelonia, pre-adamite tortoises, resembling floating islands.
Over the dimly lighted strand there trod the huge mammals of the first ages of the world, the leptotherium (slender beast), found in the caverns of Brazil; the merycotherium (ruminating beast), found in the 'drift' of iceclad Siberia.
Farther on, the pachydermatous lophiodon (crested toothed), a gigantic tapir, hides behind the rocks to dispute its prey with the anoplotherium (unarmed beast), a strange creature, which seemed a compound of horse, rhinoceros, camel, and hippopotamus.
The colossal mastodon (nipple-toothed) twists and untwists his trunk, and brays and pounds with his huge tusks the fragments of rock that cover the shore; whilst the megatherium (huge beast), buttressed upon his enormous hinder paws, grubs in the soil, awaking the sonorous echoes of the granite rocks with his tremendous roarings.
Higher up, the protopitheca - the first monkey that appeared on the globe - is climbing up the steep ascents.
Higher yet, the pterodactyle (wing-fingered) darts in irregular zigzags to and fro in the heavy air.
In the uppermost regions of the air immense birds, more powerful than the cassowary, and larger than the ostrich, spread their vast breadth of wings and strike with their heads the granite vault that bounds the sky.
All this fossil world rises to life again in my vivid imagination. I return to the scriptural periods or ages of the world, conventionally called 'days,' long before the appearance of man, when the unfinished world was as yet unfitted for his support.
Then my dream backed even farther still into the ages before the creation of living beings.
The mammals disappear, then the birds vanish, then the reptiles of the secondary period, and finally the fish, the crustaceans, molluscs, and articulated beings.
Then the zoophytes of the transition period also return to nothing.
I am the only living thing in the world: all life is concentrated in my beating heart alone.
There are no more seasons; climates are no more; the heat of the globe continually increases and neutralises that of the sun.
Vegetation becomes accelerated.
I glide like a shade amongst arborescent ferns, treading with unsteady feet the coloured marls and the particoloured clays; I lean for support against the trunks of immense conifers; I lie in the shade of sphenophylla (wedge-leaved), asterophylla (star-leaved), and lycopods, a hundred feet high.
Ages seem no more than days! I am passed, against my will, in retrograde order, through the long series of terrestrial changes.
Plants disappear; granite rocks soften; intense heat converts solid bodies into thick fluids; the waters again cover the face of the earth; they boil, they rise in whirling eddies of steam; white and ghastly mists wrap round the shifting forms of the earth, which by imperceptible degrees dissolves into a gaseous mass, glowing fiery red and white, as large and as shining as the sun.
And I myself am floating with wild caprice in the midst of this nebulous mass of fourteen hundred thousand times the volume of the earth into which it will one day be condensed, and carried forward amongst the planetary bodies.
My body is no longer firm and terrestrial; it is resolved into its constituent atoms, subtilised, volatilised.
Sublimed into imponderable vapour, I mingle and am lost in the endless foods of those vast globular volumes of vaporous mists, which roll upon their flaming orbits through infinite space.
But is it not a dream? Whither is it carrying me? My feverish hand has vainly attempted to describe upon paper its strange and wonderful details. I have forgotten everything that surrounds me. The Professor, the guide, the raft - are all gone out of my ken.
An illusion has laid hold upon me.
"What is the matter?"
my uncle breaks in.
My staring eyes are fixed vacantly upon him.
"Take care, Axel, or you will fall overboard."
At that moment I felt the sinewy hand of Hans seizing me vigorously.
But for him, carried away by my dream, I should have thrown myself into the sea.
"Is he mad?"
cried the Professor.
"What is it all about?"
at last I cried, returning to myself.
"Do you feel ill?"
my uncle asked.
"No; but I have had a strange hallucination; it is over now.
Is all going on right?"
"Yes, it is a fair wind and a fine sea; we are sailing rapidly along, and if I am not out in my reckoning, we shall soon land."
At these words I rose and gazed round upon the horizon, still everywhere bounded by clouds alone.
Saturday, August 15. - The sea unbroken all round.
No land in sight.
The horizon seems extremely distant.
My head is still stupefied with the vivid reality of my dream.
My uncle has had no dreams, but he is out of temper.
He examines the horizon all round with his glass, and folds his arms with the air of an injured man.
I remark that Professor Liedenbrock has a tendency to relapse into an impatient mood, and I make a note of it in my log.
All my danger and sufferings were needed to strike a spark of human feeling out of him; but now that I am well his nature has resumed its sway.
And yet, what cause was there for anger?
Is not the voyage prospering as favourably as possible under the circumstances?
Is not the raft spinning along with marvellous speed?
"-You seem anxious, my uncle," I said, seeing him continually with his glass to his eye.
"Anxious!
No, not at all."
"Impatient, then?"
"One might be, with less reason than now."
"Yet we are going very fast."
"What does that signify?
I am not complaining that the rate is slow, but that the sea is so wide."
I then remembered that the Professor, before starting, had estimated the length of this underground sea at thirty leagues.
Now we had made three times the distance, yet still the southern coast was not in sight.
"We are not descending as we ought to be," the Professor declares.
"We are losing time, and the fact is, I have not come all this way to take a little sail upon a pond on a raft."
He called this sea a pond, and our long voyage, taking a little sail!
"But," I remarked, "since we have followed the road that Saknussemm has shown us - "
"That is just the question.
Have we followed that road?
Did Saknussemm meet this sheet of water?
Did he cross it?
Has not the stream that we followed led us altogether astray?"
"At any rate we cannot feel sorry to have come so far.
This prospect is magnificent, and - "
"But I don't care for prospects.
I came with an object, and I mean to attain it.
Therefore don't talk to me about views and prospects."
I take this as my answer, and I leave the Professor to bite his lips with impatience.
At six in the evening Hans asks for his wages, and his three rix dollars are counted out to him.
Sunday, August 16. - Nothing new. Weather unchanged. The wind freshens. On awaking, my first thought was to observe the intensity of the light. I was possessed with an apprehension lest the electric light should grow dim, or fail altogether. But there seemed no reason to fear.
The shadow of the raft was clearly outlined upon the surface of the waves.
Truly this sea is of infinite width.
It must be as wide as the Mediterranean or the Atlantic - and why not?
My uncle took soundings several times.
He tied the heaviest of our pickaxes to a long rope which he let down two hundred fathoms.
No bottom yet; and we had some difficulty in hauling up our plummet.
But when the pick was shipped again, Hans pointed out on its surface deep prints as if it had been violently compressed between two hard bodies.
I looked at the hunter.
"Taender," said he.
I could not understand him, and turned to my uncle who was entirely absorbed in his calculations.
I had rather not disturb him while he is quiet.
I return to the Icelander.
He by a snapping motion of his jaws conveys his ideas to me.
"Teeth!"
I cried, considering the iron bar with more attention.
Yes, indeed, those are the marks of teeth imprinted upon the metal! The jaws which they arm must be possessed of amazing strength. Is there some monster beneath us belonging to the extinct races, more voracious than the shark, more fearful in vastness than the whale?
I could not take my eyes off this indented iron bar.
Surely will my last night's dream be realised?
These thoughts agitated me all day, and my imagination scarcely calmed down after several hours' sleep.
Monday, August 17. - I am trying to recall the peculiar instincts of the monsters of the pre-adamite world, who, coming next in succession after the molluscs, the crustaceans and le fishes, preceded the animals of mammalian race upon the earth. The world then belonged to reptiles.
Those monsters held the mastery in the seas of the secondary period.
They possessed a perfect organisation, gigantic proportions, prodigious strength.
The saurians of our day, the alligators and the crocodiles, are but feeble reproductions of their forefathers of primitive ages.
I shudder as I recall these monsters to my remembrance. No human eye has ever beheld them living.
They burdened this earth a thousand ages before man appeared, but their fossil remains, found in the argillaceous limestone called by the English the lias, have enabled their colossal structure to be perfectly built up again and anatomically ascertained.
I saw at the Hamburg museum the skeleton of one of these creatures thirty feet in length. Am I then fated - I, a denizen of earth - to be placed face to face with these representatives of long extinct families? No; surely it cannot be!
Yet the deep marks of conical teeth upon the iron pick are certainly those of the crocodile.
My eyes are fearfully bent upon the sea. I dread to see one of these monsters darting forth from its submarine caverns.
I suppose Professor Liedenbrock was of my opinion too, and even shared my fears, for after having examined the pick, his eyes traversed the ocean from side to side.
What a very bad notion that was of his, I thought to myself, to take soundings just here!
He has disturbed some monstrous beast in its remote den, and if we are not attacked on our voyage -
I look at our guns and see that they are all right.
My uncle notices it, and looks on approvingly.
Already widely disturbed regions on the surface of the water indicate some commotion below.
The danger is approaching.
We must be on the look out.
Tuesday, August 18. - Evening came, or rather the time came when sleep weighs down the weary eyelids, for there is no night here, and the ceaseless light wearies the eyes with its persistency just as if we were sailing under an arctic sun. Hans was at the helm.
During his watch I slept.
Two hours afterwards a terrible shock awoke me.
The raft was heaved up on a watery mountain and pitched down again, at a distance of twenty fathoms.
"What is the matter?"
shouted my uncle.
"Have we struck land?"
Hans pointed with his finger at a dark mass six hundred yards away, rising and falling alternately with heavy plunges.
I looked and cried:
"It is an enormous porpoise."
"Yes," replied my uncle, "and there is a sea lizard of vast size."
"And farther on a monstrous crocodile.
Look at its vast jaws and its rows of teeth!
It is diving down!"
"There's a whale, a whale!"
cried the Professor.
"I can see its great fins.
See how he is throwing out air and water through his blowers."
And in fact two liquid columns were rising to a considerable height above the sea. We stood amazed, thunderstruck, at the presence of such a herd of marine monsters.
They were of supernatural dimensions; the smallest of them would have crunched our raft, crew and all, at one snap of its huge jaws.
Hans wants to tack to get away from this dangerous neighbourhood; but he sees on the other hand enemies not less terrible; a tortoise forty feet long, and a serpent of thirty, lifting its fearful head and gleaming eyes above the flood.
Flight was out of the question now. The reptiles rose; they wheeled around our little raft with a rapidity greater than that of express trains. They described around us gradually narrowing circles. I took up my rifle.
But what could a ball do against the scaly armour with which these enormous beasts were clad?
We stood dumb with fear. They approach us close: on one side the crocodile, on the other the serpent. The remainder of the sea monsters have disappeared. I prepare to fire. Hans stops me by a gesture.
The two monsters pass within a hundred and fifty yards of the raft, and hurl themselves the one upon the other, with a fury which prevents them from seeing us.
At three hundred yards from us the battle was fought. We could distinctly observe the two monsters engaged in deadly conflict. But it now seems to me as if the other animals were taking part in the fray - the porpoise, the whale, the lizard, the tortoise.
Every moment I seem to see one or other of them.
I point them to the Icelander.
He shakes his head negatively.
"Tva," says he.
"What two?
Does he mean that there are only two animals?"
"He is right," said my uncle, whose glass has never left his eye.
"Surely you must be mistaken," I cried.
"No: the first of those monsters has a porpoise's snout, a lizard's head, a crocodile's teeth; and hence our mistake.
It is the ichthyosaurus (the fish lizard), the most terrible of the ancient monsters of the deep."
"And the other?"
"The other is a plesiosaurus (almost lizard), a serpent, armoured with the carapace and the paddles of a turtle; he is the dreadful enemy of the other."
Hans had spoken truly. Two monsters only were creating all this commotion; and before my eyes are two reptiles of the primitive world. I can distinguish the eye of the ichthyosaurus glowing like a red-hot coal, and as large as a man's head.
Nature has endowed it with an optical apparatus of extreme power, and capable of resisting the pressure of the great volume of water in the depths it inhabits.
It has been appropriately called the saurian whale, for it has both the swiftness and the rapid movements of this monster of our own day.
This one is not less than a hundred feet long, and I can judge of its size when it sweeps over the waters the vertical coils of its tail.
Its jaw is enormous, and according to naturalists it is armed with no less than one hundred and eighty-two teeth.
The plesiosaurus, a serpent with a cylindrical body and a short tail, has four flappers or paddles to act like oars.
Its body is entirely covered with a thick armour of scales, and its neck, as flexible as a swan's, rises thirty feet above the waves.
Those huge creatures attacked each other with the greatest animosity. They heaved around them liquid mountains, which rolled even to our raft and rocked it perilously. Twenty times we were near capsizing. Hissings of prodigious force are heard.
The two beasts are fast locked together; I cannot distinguish the one from the other.
The probable rage of the conqueror inspires us with intense fear.
One hour, two hours, pass away. The struggle continues with unabated ferocity. The combatants alternately approach and recede from our raft. We remain motionless, ready to fire. Suddenly the ichthyosaurus and the plesiosaurus disappear below, leaving a whirlpool eddying in the water.
Several minutes pass by while the fight goes on under water.
All at once an enormous head is darted up, the head of the plesiosaurus. The monster is wounded to death. I no longer see his scaly armour.
Only his long neck shoots up, drops again, coils and uncoils, droops, lashes the waters like a gigantic whip, and writhes like a worm that you tread on.
The water is splashed for a long way around.
The spray almost blinds us.
But soon the reptile's agony draws to an end; its movements become fainter, its contortions cease to be so violent, and the long serpentine form lies a lifeless log on the labouring deep.
As for the ichthyosaurus - has he returned to his submarine cavern?
or will he reappear on the surface of the sea?
Wednesday, August 19. - Fortunately the wind blows violently, and has enabled us to flee from the scene of the late terrible struggle. Hans keeps at his post at the helm.
My uncle, whom the absorbing incidents of the combat had drawn away from his contemplations, began again to look impatiently around him.
The voyage resumes its uniform tenor, which I don't care to break with a repetition of such events as yesterday's.
Thursday, Aug.
20. - Wind N.N.E., unsteady and fitful.
Temperature high.
Rate three and a half leagues an hour.
About noon a distant noise is heard.
I note the fact without being able to explain it.
It is a continuous roar.
"In the distance," says the Professor, "there is a rock or islet, against which the sea is breaking."
Hans climbs up the mast, but sees no breakers.
The ocean' is smooth and unbroken to its farthest limit.
Three hours pass away.
The roarings seem to proceed from a very distant waterfall.
I remark upon this to my uncle, who replies doubtfully: "Yes, I am convinced that I am right." Are we, then, speeding forward to some cataract which will cast us down an abyss?
This method of getting on may please the Professor, because it is vertical; but for my part I prefer the more ordinary modes of horizontal progression.
At any rate, some leagues to the windward there must be some noisy phenomenon, for now the roarings are heard with increasing loudness.
Do they proceed from the sky or the ocean?
I look up to the atmospheric vapours, and try to fathom their depths. The sky is calm and motionless. The clouds have reached the utmost limit of the lofty vault, and there lie still bathed in the bright glare of the electric light.
It is not there that we must seek for the cause of this phenomenon.
Then I examine the horizon, which is unbroken and clear of all mist.
There is no change in its aspect.
But if this noise arises from a fall, a cataract, if all this ocean flows away headlong into a lower basin yet, if that deafening roar is produced by a mass of falling water, the current must needs accelerate, and its increasing speed will give me the measure of the peril that threatens us.
I consult the current: there is none.
I throw an empty bottle into the sea: it lies still.
About four Hans rises, lays hold of the mast, climbs to its top.
Thence his eye sweeps a large area of sea, and it is fixed upon a point.
His countenance exhibits no surprise, but his eye is immovably steady.
"He sees something," says my uncle.
"I believe he does."
Hans comes down, then stretches his arm to the south, saying:
"Dere nere!"
"Down there?"
repeated my uncle.
Then, seizing his glass, he gazes attentively for a minute, which seems to me an age.
"Yes, yes!"
he cried.
"I see a vast inverted cone rising from the surface."
"Is it another sea beast?"
"Perhaps it is."
"Then let us steer farther westward, for we know something of the danger of coming across monsters of that sort."
"Let us go straight on," replied my uncle.
I appealed to Hans.
He maintained his course inflexibly.
Yet, if at our present distance from the animal, a distance of twelve leagues at the least, the column of water driven through its blowers may be distinctly seen, it must needs be of vast size.
The commonest prudence would counsel immediate flight; but we did not come so far to be prudent.
Imprudently, therefore, we pursue our way.
The nearer we approach, the higher mounts the jet of water.
What monster can possibly fill itself with such a quantity of water, and spurt it up so continuously?
At eight in the evening we are not two leagues distant from it. Its body - dusky, enormous, hillocky - lies spread upon the sea like an islet. Is it illusion or fear? Its length seems to me a couple of thousand yards.
What can be this cetacean, which neither Cuvier nor Blumenbach knew anything about?
It lies motionless, as if asleep; the sea seems unable to move it in the least; it is the waves that undulate upon its sides.
The column of water thrown up to a height of five hundred feet falls in rain with a deafening uproar.
And here are we scudding like lunatics before the wind, to get near to a monster that a hundred whales a day would not satisfy!
Terror seizes upon me.
I refuse to go further.
I will cut the halliards if necessary!
I am in open mutiny against the Professor, who vouchsafes no answer.
Suddenly Hans rises, and pointing with his finger at the menacing object, he says:
"Holm."
"An island!"
cries my uncle.
"That's not an island!"
I cried sceptically.
"It's nothing else," shouted the Professor, with a loud laugh.
"But that column of water?"
"Geyser," said Hans.
"No doubt it is a geyser, like those in Iceland."
At first I protest against being so widely mistaken as to have taken an island for a marine monster.
But the evidence is against me, and I have to confess my error.
It is nothing worse than a natural phenomenon.
As we approach nearer the dimensions of the liquid column become magnificent. The islet resembles, with a most deceiving likeness, an enormous cetacean, whose head dominates the waves at a height of twenty yards. The geyser, a word meaning 'fury,' rises majestically from its extremity.
Deep and heavy explosions are heard from time to time, when the enormous jet, possessed with more furious violence, shakes its plumy crest, and springs with a bound till it reaches the lowest stratum of the clouds.
It stands alone.
No steam vents, no hot springs surround it, and all the volcanic power of the region is concentrated here.
Sparks of electric fire mingle with the dazzling sheaf of lighted fluid, every drop of which refracts the prismatic colours.
"Let us land," said the Professor.
"But we must carefully avoid this waterspout, which would sink our raft in a moment."
Hans, steering with his usual skill, brought us to the other extremity of the islet.
I leaped up on the rock; my uncle lightly followed, while our hunter remained at his post, like a man too wise ever to be astonished.
We walked upon granite mingled with siliceous tufa. The soil shivers and shakes under our feet, like the sides of an overheated boiler filled with steam struggling to get loose. We come in sight of a small central basin, out of which the geyser springs.
I plunge a register thermometer into the boiling water.
It marks an intense heat of 325 deg.,
which is far above the boiling point; therefore this water issues from an ardent furnace, which is not at all in harmony with Professor Liedenbrock's theories.
I cannot help making the remark.
"Well," he replied, "how does that make against my doctrine?"
"Oh, nothing at all," I said, seeing that I was going in opposition to immovable obstinacy.
Still I am constrained to confess that hitherto we have been wonderfully favoured, and that for some reason unknown to myself we have accomplished our journey under singularly favourable conditions of temperature.
But it seems manifest to me that some day we shall reach a region where the central heat attains its highest limits, and goes beyond a point that can be registered by our thermometers.
"That is what we shall see."
So says the Professor, who, having named this volcanic islet after his nephew, gives the signal to embark again.
For some minutes I am still contemplating the geyser.
I notice that it throws up its column of water with variable force: sometimes sending it to a great height, then again to a lower, which I attribute to the variable pressure of the steam accumulated in its reservoir.
At last we leave the island, rounding away past the low rocks on its southern shore.
Hans has taken advantage of the halt to refit his rudder.
But before going any farther I make a few observations, to calculate the distance we have gone over, and note them in my journal. We have crossed two hundred and seventy leagues of sea since leaving Port Graeuben; and we are six hundred and twenty leagues from Iceland, under England.
[1]
Friday, August 21. - On the morrow the magnificent geyser has disappeared.
The wind has risen, and has rapidly carried us away from Axel Island.
The roarings become lost in the distance.
The weather - if we may use that term - will change before long. The atmosphere is charged with vapours, pervaded with the electricity generated by the evaporation of saline waters. The clouds are sinking lower, and assume an olive hue.
The electric light can scarcely penetrate through the dense curtain which has dropped over the theatre on which the battle of the elements is about to be waged.
I feel peculiar sensations, like many creatures on earth at the approach of violent atmospheric changes.
The heavily voluted cumulus clouds lower gloomily and threateningly; they wear that implacable look which I have sometimes noticed at the outbreak of a great storm.
The air is heavy; the sea is calm.
In the distance the clouds resemble great bales of cotton, piled up in picturesque disorder. By degrees they dilate, and gain in huge size what they lose in number.
Such is their ponderous weight that they cannot rise from the horizon; but, obeying an impulse from higher currents, their dense consistency slowly yields.
The gloom upon them deepens; and they soon present to our view a ponderous mass of almost level surface.
From time to time a fleecy tuft of mist, with yet some gleaming light left upon it, drops down upon the dense floor of grey, and loses itself in the opaque and impenetrable mass.
The atmosphere is evidently charged and surcharged with electricity. My whole body is saturated; my hair bristles just as when you stand upon an insulated stool under the action of an electrical machine.
It seems to me as if my companions, the moment they touched me, would receive a severe shock like that from an electric eel.
At ten in the morning the symptoms of storm become aggravated.
The wind never lulls but to acquire increased strength; the vast bank of heavy clouds is a huge reservoir of fearful windy gusts and rushing storms.
I am loth to believe these atmospheric menaces, and yet I cannot help muttering:
"Here's some very bad weather coming on."
The Professor made no answer.
His temper is awful, to judge from the working of his features, as he sees this vast length of ocean unrolling before him to an indefinite extent.
He can only spare time to shrug his shoulders viciously.
"There's a heavy storm coming on," I cried, pointing towards the horizon.
"Those clouds seem as if they were going to crush the sea."
A deep silence falls on all around. The lately roaring winds are hushed into a dead calm; nature seems to breathe no more, and to be sinking into the stillness of death.
On the mast already I see the light play of a lambent St. Elmo's fire; the outstretched sail catches not a breath of wind, and hangs like a sheet of lead.
The rudder stands motionless in a sluggish, waveless sea.
But if we have now ceased to advance why do we yet leave that sail loose, which at the first shock of the tempest may capsize us in a moment?
"Let us reef the sail and cut the mast down!"
I cried.
"That will be safest."
"No, no!
Never!"
shouted my impetuous uncle.
"Never!
Let the wind catch us if it will!
What I want is to get the least glimpse of rock or shore, even if our raft should be smashed into shivers!"
The words were hardly out of his mouth when a sudden change took place in the southern sky. The piled-up vapours condense into water; and the air, put into violent action to supply the vacuum left by the condensation of the mists, rouses itself into a whirlwind.
It rushes on from the farthest recesses of the vast cavern.
The darkness deepens; scarcely can I jot down a few hurried notes.
The helm makes a bound.
My uncle falls full length; I creep close to him.
He has laid a firm hold upon a rope, and appears to watch with grim satisfaction this awful display of elemental strife.
Hans stirs not. His long hair blown by the pelting storm, and laid flat across his immovable countenance, makes him a strange figure; for the end of each lock of loose flowing hair is tipped with little luminous radiations.
This frightful mask of electric sparks suggests to me, even in this dizzy excitement, a comparison with pre-adamite man, the contemporary of the ichthyosaurus and the megatherium. [
1]
The mast yet holds firm.
The sail stretches tight like a bubble ready to burst.
The raft flies at a rate that I cannot reckon, but not so fast as the foaming clouds of spray which it dashes from side to side in its headlong speed.
"The sail!
the sail!"
I cry, motioning to lower it.
"No!"
replies my uncle.
"Nej!"
repeats Hans, leisurely shaking his head.
But now the rain forms a rushing cataract in front of that horizon toward which we are running with such maddening speed.
But before it has reached us the rain cloud parts asunder, the sea boils, and the electric fires are brought into violent action by a mighty chemical power that descends from the higher regions.
The most vivid flashes of lightning are mingled with the violent crash of continuous thunder.
Ceaseless fiery arrows dart in and out amongst the flying thunder-clouds; the vaporous mass soon glows with incandescent heat; hailstones rattle fiercely down, and as they dash upon our iron tools they too emit gleams and flashes of lurid light.
The heaving waves resemble fiery volcanic hills, each belching forth its own interior flames, and every crest is plumed with dancing fire.
My eyes fail under the dazzling light, my ears are stunned with the incessant crash of thunder.
I must be bound to the mast, which bows like a reed before the mighty strength of the storm.
(Here my notes become vague and indistinct. I have only been able to find a few which I seem to have jotted down almost unconsciously.
But their very brevity and their obscurity reveal the intensity of the excitement which dominated me, and describe the actual position even better than my memory could do.)
Sunday, 23. - Where are we?
Driven forward with a swiftness that cannot be measured.
The night was fearful; no abatement of the storm.
The din and uproar are incessant; our ears are bleeding; to exchange a word is impossible.
The lightning flashes with intense brilliancy, and never seems to cease for a moment. Zigzag streams of bluish white fire dash down upon the sea and rebound, and then take an upward flight till they strike the granite vault that overarches our heads.
Suppose that solid roof should crumble down upon our heads!
Other flashes with incessant play cross their vivid fires, while others again roll themselves into balls of living fire which explode like bombshells, but the music of which scarcely-adds to the din of the battle strife that almost deprives us of our senses of hearing and sight; the limit of intense loudness has been passed within which the human ear can distinguish one sound from another.
If all the powder magazines in the world were to explode at once, we should hear no more than we do now.
From the under surface of the clouds there are continual emissions of lurid light; electric matter is in continual evolution from their component molecules; the gaseous elements of the air need to be slaked with moisture; for innumerable columns of water rush upwards into the air and fall back again in white foam.
Whither are we flying?
My uncle lies full length across the raft.
The heat increases.
I refer to the thermometer; it indicates .
.
.
(the figure is obliterated).
Monday, August 24. - Will there be an end to it?
Is the atmospheric condition, having once reached this density, to become final?
We are prostrated and worn out with fatigue.
But Hans is as usual.
The raft bears on still to the south-east.
We have made two hundred leagues since we left Axel Island.
At noon the violence of the storm redoubles.
We are obliged to secure as fast as possible every article that belongs to our cargo.
Each of us is lashed to some part of the raft.
The waves rise above our heads.
For three days we have never been able to make each other hear a word.
Our mouths open, our lips move, but not a word can be heard.
We cannot even make ourselves heard by approaching our mouth close to the ear.
My uncle has drawn nearer to me.
He has uttered a few words.
They seem to be 'We are lost'; but I am not sure.
At last I write down the words: "Let us lower the sail."
He nods his consent.
Scarcely has he lifted his head again before a ball of fire has bounded over the waves and lighted on board our raft.
Mast and sail flew up in an instant together, and I saw them carried up to prodigious height, resembling in appearance a pterodactyle, one of those strong birds of the infant world.
We lay there, our blood running cold with unspeakable terror. The fireball, half of it white, half azure blue, and the size of a ten-inch shell, moved slowly about the raft, but revolving on its own axis with astonishing velocity, as if whipped round by the force of the whirlwind.
Here it comes, there it glides, now it is up the ragged stump of the mast, thence it lightly leaps on the provision bag, descends with a light bound, and just skims the powder magazine.
Horrible!
we shall be blown up; but no, the dazzling disk of mysterious light nimbly leaps aside; it approaches Hans, who fixes his blue eye upon it steadily; it threatens the head of my uncle, who falls upon his knees with his head down to avoid it.
And now my turn comes; pale and trembling under the blinding splendour and the melting heat, it drops at my feet, spinning silently round upon the deck; I try to move my foot away, but cannot.
A suffocating smell of nitrogen fills the air, it enters the throat, it fills the lungs.
We suffer stifling pains.
Why am I unable to move my foot? Is it riveted to the planks? Alas! the fall upon our fated raft of this electric globe has magnetised every iron article on board.
The instruments, the tools, our guns, are clashing and clanking violently in their collisions with each other; the nails of my boots cling tenaciously to a plate of iron let into the timbers, and I cannot draw my foot away from the spot.
At last by a violent effort I release myself at the instant when the ball in its gyrations was about to seize upon it, and carry me off my feet ....
Ah!
what a flood of intense and dazzling light!
the globe has burst, and we are deluged with tongues of fire!
Then all the light disappears.
I could just see my uncle at full length on the raft, and Hans still at his helm and spitting fire under the action of the electricity which has saturated him.
But where are we going to?
Where?
Tuesday, August 25. - I recover from a long swoon. The storm continues to roar and rage; the lightnings dash hither and thither, like broods of fiery serpents filling all the air. Are we still under the sea? Yes, we are borne at incalculable speed.
We have been carried under England, under the channel, under France, perhaps under the whole of Europe.
A fresh noise is heard!
Surely it is the sea breaking upon the rocks!
But then .
.
.
.
Here I end what I may call my log, happily saved from the wreck, and I resume my narrative as before.
What happened when the raft was dashed upon the rocks is more than I can tell.
I felt myself hurled into the waves; and if I escaped from death, and if my body was not torn over the sharp edges of the rocks, it was because the powerful arm of Hans came to my rescue.
The brave Icelander carried me out of the reach of the waves, over a burning sand where I found myself by the side of my uncle.
Then he returned to the rocks, against which the furious waves were beating, to save what he could.
I was unable to speak.
I was shattered with fatigue and excitement; I wanted a whole hour to recover even a little.
But a deluge of rain was still falling, though with that violence which generally denotes the near cessation of a storm. A few overhanging rocks afforded us some shelter from the storm.
Hans prepared some food, which I could not touch; and each of us, exhausted with three sleepless nights, fell into a broken and painful sleep.
The next day the weather was splendid.
The sky and the sea had sunk into sudden repose.
Every trace of the awful storm had disappeared.
The exhilarating voice of the Professor fell upon my ears as I awoke; he was ominously cheerful.
"Well, my boy," he cried, "have you slept well?"
Would not any one have thought that we were still in our cheerful little house on the Koenigstrasse and that I was only just coming down to breakfast, and that I was to be married to Graeuben that day?
Alas! if the tempest had but sent the raft a little more east, we should have passed under Germany, under my beloved town of Hamburg, under the very street where dwelt all that I loved most in the world. Then only forty leagues would have separated us!
But they were forty leagues perpendicular of solid granite wall, and in reality we were a thousand leagues asunder!
All these painful reflections rapidly crossed my mind before I could answer my uncle's question.
"Well, now," he repeated, "won't you tell me how you have slept?"
"Oh, very well," I said.
"I am only a little knocked up, but I shall soon be better."
"Oh," says my uncle, "that's nothing to signify.
You are only a little bit tired."
"But you, uncle, you seem in very good spirits this morning."
"Delighted, my boy, delighted.
We have got there."
"To our journey's end?"
"No; but we have got to the end of that endless sea.
Now we shall go by land, and really begin to go down!
down!
down!"
"But, my dear uncle, do let me ask you one question."
"Of course, Axel."
"How about returning?"
"Returning?
Why, you are talking about the return before the arrival."
"No, I only want to know how that is to be managed."
"In the simplest way possible. When we have reached the centre of the globe, either we shall find some new way to get back, or we shall come back like decent folks the way we came.
I feel pleased at the thought that it is sure not to be shut against us."
"But then we shall have to refit the raft."
"Of course."
"Then, as to provisions, have we enough to last?"
"Yes; to be sure we have.
Hans is a clever fellow, and I am sure he must have saved a large part of our cargo.
But still let us go and make sure."
We left this grotto which lay open to every wind. At the same time I cherished a trembling hope which was a fear as well. It seemed to me impossible that the terrible wreck of the raft should not have destroyed everything on board.
On my arrival on the shore I found Hans surrounded by an assemblage of articles all arranged in good order.
My uncle shook hands with him with a lively gratitude.
This man, with almost superhuman devotion, had been at work all the while that we were asleep, and had saved the most precious of the articles at the risk of his life.
Not that we had suffered no losses.
For instance, our firearms; but we might do without them.
Our stock of powder had remained uninjured after having risked blowing up during the storm.
"Well," cried the Professor, "as we have no guns we cannot hunt, that's all."
"Yes, but how about the instruments?"
"Here is the aneroid, the most useful of all, and for which I would have given all the others.
By means of it I can calculate the depth and know when we have reached the centre; without it we might very likely go beyond, and come out at the antipodes!"
Such high spirits as these were rather too strong.
"But where is the compass?
I asked.
"Here it is, upon this rock, in perfect condition, as well as the thermometers and the chronometer.
The hunter is a splendid fellow."
There was no denying it.
We had all our instruments.
As for tools and appliances, there they all lay on the ground - ladders, ropes, picks, spades, etc.
Still there was the question of provisions to be settled, and I asked - "How are we off for provisions?"
The boxes containing these were in a line upon the shore, in a perfect state of preservation; for the most part the sea had spared them, and what with biscuits, salt meat, spirits, and salt fish, we might reckon on four months' supply.
"Four months!"
cried the Professor.
"We have time to go and to return; and with what is left I will give a grand dinner to my friends at the Johannaeum."
I ought by this time to have been quite accustomed to my uncle's ways; yet there was always something fresh about him to astonish me.
"Now," said he, "we will replenish our supply of water with the rain which the storm has left in all these granite basins; therefore we shall have no reason to fear anything from thirst.
As for the raft, I will recommend Hans to do his best to repair it, although I don't expect it will be of any further use to us."
"How so?"
I cried.
"An idea of my own, my lad.
I don't think we shall come out by the way that we went in."
I stared at the Professor with a good deal of mistrust.
I asked, was he not touched in the brain?
And yet there was method in his madness.
"And now let us go to breakfast," said he.
I followed him to a headland, after he had given his instructions to the hunter. There preserved meat, biscuit, and tea made us an excellent meal, one of the best I ever remember.
Hunger, the fresh air, the calm quiet weather, after the commotions we had gone through, all contributed to give me a good appetite.
Whilst breakfasting I took the opportunity to put to my uncle the question where we were now.
"That seems to me," I said, "rather difficult to make out."
"Yes, it is difficult," he said, "to calculate exactly; perhaps even impossible, since during these three stormy days I have been unable to keep any account of the rate or direction of the raft; but still we may get an approximation."
"The last observation," I remarked, "was made on the island, when the geyser was - "
"You mean Axel Island.
Don't decline the honour of having given your name to the first island ever discovered in the central parts of the globe."
"Well," said I, "let it be Axel Island.
Then we had cleared two hundred and seventy leagues of sea, and we were six hundred leagues from Iceland."
"Very well," answered my uncle; "let us start from that point and count four days' storm, during which our rate cannot have been less than eighty leagues in the twenty-four hours."
"That is right; and this would make three hundred leagues more."
"Yes, and the Liedenbrock sea would be six hundred leagues from shore to shore.
Surely, Axel, it may vie in size with the Mediterranean itself."
"Especially," I replied, "if it happens that we have only crossed it in its narrowest part.
And it is a curious circumstance," I added, "that if my computations are right, and we are nine hundred leagues from Rejkiavik, we have now the Mediterranean above our head."
"That is a good long way, my friend.
But whether we are under Turkey or the Atlantic depends very much upon the question in what direction we have been moving.
Perhaps we have deviated."
"No, I think not.
Our course has been the same all along, and I believe this shore is south-east of Port Graeuben."
"Well," replied my uncle, "we may easily ascertain this by consulting the compass.
Let us go and see what it says."
The Professor moved towards the rock upon which Hans had laid down the instruments. He was gay and full of spirits; he rubbed his hands, he studied his attitudes. I followed him, curious to know if I was right in my estimate.
As soon as we had arrived at the rock my uncle took the compass, laid it horizontally, and questioned the needle, which, after a few oscillations, presently assumed a fixed position.
My uncle looked, and looked, and looked again.
He rubbed his eyes, and then turned to me thunderstruck with some unexpected discovery.
"What is the matter?"
I asked.
He motioned to me to look. An exclamation of astonishment burst from me. The north pole of the needle was turned to what we supposed to be the south. It pointed to the shore instead of to the open sea!
I shook the box, examined it again, it was in perfect condition.
In whatever position I placed the box the needle pertinaciously returned to this unexpected quarter.
Therefore there seemed no reason to doubt that during the storm there had been a sudden change of wind unperceived by us, which had brought our raft back to the shore which we thought we had left so long a distance behind us.
How shall I describe the strange series of passions which in succession shook the breast of Professor Liedenbrock? First stupefaction, then incredulity, lastly a downright burst of rage. Never had I seen the man so put out of countenance and so disturbed.
The fatigues of our passage across, the dangers met, had all to be begun over again.
We had gone backwards instead of forwards!
But my uncle rapidly recovered himself.
"Aha! will fate play tricks upon me? Will the elements lay plots against me? Shall fire, air, and water make a combined attack against me? Well, they shall know what a determined man can do. I will not yield.
I will not stir a single foot backwards, and it will be seen whether man or nature is to have the upper hand!"
Erect upon the rock, angry and threatening, Otto Liedenbrock was a rather grotesque fierce parody upon the fierce Achilles defying the lightning.
But I thought it my duty to interpose and attempt to lay some restraint upon this unmeasured fanaticism.
"Just listen to me," I said firmly.
"Ambition must have a limit somewhere; we cannot perform impossibilities; we are not at all fit for another sea voyage; who would dream of undertaking a voyage of five hundred leagues upon a heap of rotten planks, with a blanket in rags for a sail, a stick for a mast, and fierce winds in our teeth?
We cannot steer; we shall be buffeted by the tempests, and we should be fools and madmen to attempt to cross a second time."
I was able to develop this series of unanswerable reasons for ten minutes without interruption; not that the Professor was paying any respectful attention to his nephew's arguments, but because he was deaf to all my eloquence.
"To the raft!"
he shouted.
Such was his only reply.
It was no use for me to entreat, supplicate, get angry, or do anything else in the way of opposition; it would only have been opposing a will harder than the granite rock.
Hans was finishing the repairs of the raft. One would have thought that this strange being was guessing at my uncle's intentions. With a few more pieces of surturbrand he had refitted our vessel.
A sail already hung from the new mast, and the wind was playing in its waving folds.
The Professor said a few words to the guide, and immediately he put everything on board and arranged every necessary for our departure.
The air was clear - and the north-west wind blew steadily.
What could I do? Could I stand against the two? It was impossible? If Hans had but taken my side! But no, it was not to be. The Icelander seemed to have renounced all will of his own and made a vow to forget and deny himself.
I could get nothing out of a servant so feudalised, as it were, to his master.
My only course was to proceed.
I was therefore going with as much resignation as I could find to resume my accustomed place on the raft, when my uncle laid his hand upon my shoulder.
"We shall not sail until to-morrow," he said.
I made a movement intended to express resignation.
"I must neglect nothing," he said; "and since my fate has driven me on this part of the coast, I will not leave it until I have examined it."
To understand what followed, it must be borne in mind that, through circumstances hereafter to be explained, we were not really where the Professor supposed we were.
In fact we were not upon the north shore of the sea.
"Now let us start upon fresh discoveries," I said.
And leaving Hans to his work we started off together. The space between the water and the foot of the cliffs was considerable. It took half an hour to bring us to the wall of rock.
We trampled under our feet numberless shells of all the forms and sizes which existed in the earliest ages of the world.
I also saw immense carapaces more than fifteen feet in diameter.
They had been the coverings of those gigantic glyptodons or armadilloes of the pleiocene period, of which the modern tortoise is but a miniature representative. [
1] The soil was besides this scattered with stony fragments, boulders rounded by water action, and ridged up in successive lines.
I was therefore led to the conclusion that at one time the sea must have covered the ground on which we were treading.
On the loose and scattered rocks, now out of the reach of the highest tides, the waves had left manifest traces of their power to wear their way in the hardest stone.
This might up to a certain point explain the existence of an ocean forty leagues beneath the surface of the globe.
But in my opinion this liquid mass would be lost by degrees farther and farther within the interior of the earth, and it certainly had its origin in the waters of the ocean overhead, which had made their way hither through some fissure.
Yet it must be believed that that fissure is now closed, and that all this cavern or immense reservoir was filled in a very short time.
Perhaps even this water, subjected to the fierce action of central heat, had partly been resolved into vapour.
This would explain the existence of those clouds suspended over our heads and the development of that electricity which raised such tempests within the bowels of the earth.
This theory of the phenomena we had witnessed seemed satisfactory to me; for however great and stupendous the phenomena of nature, fixed physical laws will or may always explain them.
We were therefore walking upon sedimentary soil, the deposits of the waters of former ages.
The Professor was carefully examining every little fissure in the rocks.
Wherever he saw a hole he always wanted to know the depth of it.
To him this was important.
We had traversed the shores of the Liedenbrock sea for a mile when we observed a sudden change in the appearance of the soil. It seemed upset, contorted, and convulsed by a violent upheaval of the lower strata.
In many places depressions or elevations gave witness to some tremendous power effecting the dislocation of strata.
We moved with difficulty across these granite fissures and chasms mingled with silex, crystals of quartz, and alluvial deposits, when a field, nay, more than a field, a vast plain, of bleached bones lay spread before us.
It seemed like an immense cemetery, where the remains of twenty ages mingled their dust together.
Huge mounds of bony fragments rose stage after stage in the distance.
They undulated away to the limits of the horizon, and melted in the distance in a faint haze.
There within three square miles were accumulated the materials for a complete history of the animal life of ages, a history scarcely outlined in the too recent strata of the inhabited world.
But an impatient curiosity impelled our steps; crackling and rattling, our feet were trampling on the remains of prehistoric animals and interesting fossils, the possession of which is a matter of rivalry and contention between the museums of great cities.
A thousand Cuviers could never have reconstructed the organic remains deposited in this magnificent and unparalleled collection.
I stood amazed. My uncle had uplifted his long arms to the vault which was our sky; his mouth gaping wide, his eyes flashing behind his shining spectacles, his head balancing with an up-and-down motion, his whole attitude denoted unlimited astonishment.
Here he stood facing an immense collection of scattered leptotheria, mericotheria, lophiodia, anoplotheria, megatheria, mastodons, protopithecae, pterodactyles, and all sorts of extinct monsters here assembled together for his special satisfaction.
Fancy an enthusiastic bibliomaniac suddenly brought into the midst of the famous Alexandrian library burnt by Omar and restored by a miracle from its ashes!
just such a crazed enthusiast was my uncle, Professor Liedenbrock.
But more was to come, when, with a rush through clouds of bone dust, he laid his hand upon a bare skull, and cried with a voice trembling with excitement:
"Axel!
Axel!
a human head!"
"A human skull?"
I cried, no less astonished.
"Yes, nephew.
Aha!
M. Milne-Edwards!
Ah!
M. de Quatrefages, how I wish you were standing here at the side of Otto Liedenbrock!"
To understand this apostrophe of my uncle's, made to absent French savants, it will be necessary to allude to an event of high importance in a palaeontological point of view, which had occurred a little while before our departure.
On the 28th of March, 1863, some excavators working under the direction of M. Boucher de Perthes, in the stone quarries of Moulin Quignon, near Abbeville, in the department of Somme, found a human jawbone fourteen feet beneath the surface.
It was the first fossil of this nature that had ever been brought to light.
Not far distant were found stone hatchets and flint arrow-heads stained and encased by lapse of time with a uniform coat of rust.
The noise of this discovery was very great, not in France alone, but in England and in Germany. Several savants of the French Institute, and amongst them MM.
Milne-Edwards and de Quatrefages, saw at once the importance of this discovery, proved to demonstration the genuineness of the bone in question, and became the most ardent defendants in what the English called this 'trial of a jawbone.'
To the geologists of the United Kingdom, who believed in the certainty of the fact - Messrs.
Falconer, Busk, Carpenter, and others - scientific Germans were soon joined, and amongst them the forwardest, the most fiery, and the most enthusiastic, was my uncle Liedenbrock.
Therefore the genuineness of a fossil human relic of the quaternary period seemed to be incontestably proved and admitted.
It is true that this theory met with a most obstinate opponent in M. Elie de Beaumont.
This high authority maintained that the soil of Moulin Quignon was not diluvial at all, but was of much more recent formation; and, agreeing in that with Cuvier, he refused to admit that the human species could be contemporary with the animals of the quaternary period.
My uncle Liedenbrock, along with the great body of the geologists, had maintained his ground, disputed, and argued, until M. Elie de Beaumont stood almost alone in his opinion.
We knew all these details, but we were not aware that since our departure the question had advanced to farther stages.
Other similar maxillaries, though belonging to individuals of various types and different nations, were found in the loose grey soil of certain grottoes in France, Switzerland, and Belgium, as well as weapons, tools, earthen utensils, bones of children and adults.
The existence therefore of man in the quaternary period seemed to become daily more certain.
Nor was this all. Fresh discoveries of remains in the pleiocene formation had emboldened other geologists to refer back the human species to a higher antiquity still.
It is true that these remains were not human bones, but objects bearing the traces of his handiwork, such as fossil leg-bones of animals, sculptured and carved evidently by the hand of man.
Thus, at one bound, the record of the existence of man receded far back into the history of the ages past; he was a predecessor of the mastodon; he was a contemporary of the southern elephant; he lived a hundred thousand years ago, when, according to geologists, the pleiocene formation was in progress.
Such then was the state of palaeontological science, and what we knew of it was sufficient to explain our behaviour in the presence of this stupendous Golgotha.
Any one may now understand the frenzied excitement of my uncle, when, twenty yards farther on, he found himself face to face with a primitive man!
It was a perfectly recognisable human body. Had some particular soil, like that of the cemetery St. Michel, at Bordeaux, preserved it thus for so many ages? It might be so.
But this dried corpse, with its parchment-like skin drawn tightly over the bony frame, the limbs still preserving their shape, sound teeth, abundant hair, and finger and toe nails of frightful length, this desiccated mummy startled us by appearing just as it had lived countless ages ago.
I stood mute before this apparition of remote antiquity.
My uncle, usually so garrulous, was struck dumb likewise.
We raised the body.
We stood it up against a rock.
It seemed to stare at us out of its empty orbits.
We sounded with our knuckles his hollow frame.
After some moments' silence the Professor was himself again. Otto Liedenbrock, yielding to his nature, forgot all the circumstances of our eventful journey, forgot where we were standing, forgot the vaulted cavern which contained us.
No doubt he was in mind back again in his Johannaeum, holding forth to his pupils, for he assumed his learned air; and addressing himself to an imaginary audience, he proceeded thus:
"Gentlemen, I have the honour to introduce to you a man of the quaternary or post-tertiary system. Eminent geologists have denied his existence, others no less eminent have affirmed it.
The St. Thomases of palaeontology, if they were here, might now touch him with their fingers, and would be obliged to acknowledge their error.
I am quite aware that science has to be on its guard with discoveries of this kind.
I know what capital enterprising individuals like Barnum have made out of fossil men.
I have heard the tale of the kneepan of Ajax, the pretended body of Orestes claimed to have been found by the Spartans, and of the body of Asterius, ten cubits long, of which Pausanias speaks.
I have read the reports of the skeleton of Trapani, found in the fourteenth century, and which was at the time identified as that of Polyphemus; and the history of the giant unearthed in the sixteenth century near Palermo.
You know as well as I do, gentlemen, the analysis made at Lucerne in 1577 of those huge bones which the celebrated Dr. Felix Plater affirmed to be those of a giant nineteen feet high.
I have gone through the treatises of Cassanion, and all those memoirs, pamphlets, answers, and rejoinders published respecting the skeleton of Teutobochus, the invader of Gaul, dug out of a sandpit in the Dauphine, in 1613.
In the eighteenth century I would have stood up for Scheuchzer's pre-adamite man against Peter Campet.
I have perused a writing, entitled Gigan - "
Here my uncle's unfortunate infirmity met him - that of being unable in public to pronounce hard words.
"The pamphlet entitled Gigan - "
He could get no further.
"Giganteo - "
It was not to be done.
The unlucky word would not come out.
At the Johannaeum there would have been a laugh.
"Gigantosteologie," at last the Professor burst out, between two words which I shall not record here.
Then rushing on with renewed vigour, and with great animation:
"Yes, gentlemen, I know all these things, and more. I know that Cuvier and Blumenbach have recognised in these bones nothing more remarkable than the bones of the mammoth and other mammals of the post-tertiary period. But in the presence of this specimen to doubt would be to insult science.
There stands the body!
You may see it, touch it.
It is not a mere skeleton; it is an entire body, preserved for a purely anthropological end and purpose."
I was good enough not to contradict this startling assertion.
"If I could only wash it in a solution of sulphuric acid," pursued my uncle, "I should be able to clear it from all the earthy particles and the shells which are incrusted about it. But I do not possess that valuable solvent.
Yet, such as it is, the body shall tell us its own wonderful story."
Here the Professor laid hold of the fossil skeleton, and handled it with the skill of a dexterous showman.
"You see," he said, "that it is not six feet long, and that we are still separated by a long interval from the pretended race of giants. As for the family to which it belongs, it is evidently Caucasian. It is the white race, our own.
The skull of this fossil is a regular oval, or rather ovoid.
It exhibits no prominent cheekbones, no projecting jaws.
It presents no appearance of that prognathism which diminishes the facial angle. [
1] Measure that angle.
It is nearly ninety degrees.
But I will go further in my deductions, and I will affirm that this specimen of the human family is of the Japhetic race, which has since spread from the Indies to the Atlantic.
Don't smile, gentlemen."
Nobody was smiling; but the learned Professor was frequently disturbed by the broad smiles provoked by his learned eccentricities.
"Yes," he pursued with animation, "this is a fossil man, the contemporary of the mastodons whose remains fill this amphitheatre.
But if you ask me how he came there, how those strata on which he lay slipped down into this enormous hollow in the globe, I confess I cannot answer that question.
No doubt in the post-tertiary period considerable commotions were still disturbing the crust of the earth.
The long-continued cooling of the globe produced chasms, fissures, clefts, and faults, into which, very probably, portions of the upper earth may have fallen.
I make no rash assertions; but there is the man surrounded by his own works, by hatchets, by flint arrow-heads, which are the characteristics of the stone age.
And unless he came here, like myself, as a tourist on a visit and as a pioneer of science, I can entertain no doubt of the authenticity of his remote origin."
The Professor ceased to speak, and the audience broke out into loud and unanimous applause.
For of course my uncle was right, and wiser men than his nephew would have had some trouble to refute his statements.
Another remarkable thing.
This fossil body was not the only one in this immense catacomb.
We came upon other bodies at every step amongst this mortal dust, and my uncle might select the most curious of these specimens to demolish the incredulity of sceptics.
In fact it was a wonderful spectacle, that of these generations of men and animals commingled in a common cemetery. Then one very serious question arose presently which we scarcely dared to suggest.
Had all those creatures slided through a great fissure in the crust of the earth, down to the shores of the Liedenbrock sea, when they were dead and turning to dust, or had they lived and grown and died here in this subterranean world under a false sky, just like inhabitants of the upper earth?
Until the present time we had seen alive only marine monsters and fishes.
Might not some living man, some native of the abyss, be yet a wanderer below on this desert strand?
For another half hour we trod upon a pavement of bones.
We pushed on, impelled by our burning curiosity.
What other marvels did this cavern contain?
What new treasures lay here for science to unfold?
I was prepared for any surprise, my imagination was ready for any astonishment however astounding.
We had long lost sight of the sea shore behind the hills of bones. The rash Professor, careless of losing his way, hurried me forward. We advanced in silence, bathed in luminous electric fluid.
By some phenomenon which I am unable to explain, it lighted up all sides of every object equally.
Such was its diffusiveness, there being no central point from which the light emanated, that shadows no longer existed.
You might have thought yourself under the rays of a vertical sun in a tropical region at noonday and the height of summer.
No vapour was visible.
The rocks, the distant mountains, a few isolated clumps of forest trees in the distance, presented a weird and wonderful aspect under these totally new conditions of a universal diffusion of light.
We were like Hoffmann's shadowless man.
After walking a mile we reached the outskirts of a vast forest, but not one of those forests of fungi which bordered Port Graeuben.
Here was the vegetation of the tertiary period in its fullest blaze of magnificence. Tall palms, belonging to species no longer living, splendid palmacites, firs, yews, cypress trees, thujas, representatives of the conifers, were linked together by a tangled network of long climbing plants.
A soft carpet of moss and hepaticas luxuriously clothed the soil.
A few sparkling streams ran almost in silence under what would have been the shade of the trees, but that there was no shadow.
On their banks grew tree-ferns similar to those we grow in hothouses.
But a remarkable feature was the total absence of colour in all those trees, shrubs, and plants, growing without the life-giving heat and light of the sun.
Everything seemed mixed-up and confounded in one uniform silver grey or light brown tint like that of fading and faded leaves.
Not a green leaf anywhere, and the flowers - which were abundant enough in the tertiary period, which first gave birth to flowers - looked like brown-paper flowers, without colour or scent.
My uncle Liedenbrock ventured to penetrate under this colossal grove. I followed him, not without fear. Since nature had here provided vegetable nourishment, why should not the terrible mammals be there too?
I perceived in the broad clearings left by fallen trees, decayed with age, leguminose plants, acerineae, rubiceae and many other eatable shrubs, dear to ruminant animals at every period.
Then I observed, mingled together in confusion, trees of countries far apart on the surface of the globe.
The oak and the palm were growing side by side, the Australian eucalyptus leaned against the Norwegian pine, the birch-tree of the north mingled its foliage with New Zealand kauris.
It was enough to distract the most ingenious classifier of terrestrial botany.
Suddenly I halted.
I drew back my uncle.
The diffused light revealed the smallest object in the dense and distant thickets. I had thought I saw - no! I did see, with my own eyes, vast colossal forms moving amongst the trees.
They were gigantic animals; it was a herd of mastodons - not fossil remains, but living and resembling those the bones of which were found in the marshes of Ohio in 1801.
I saw those huge elephants whose long, flexible trunks were grouting and turning up the soil under the trees like a legion of serpents.
I could hear the crashing noise of their long ivory tusks boring into the old decaying trunks.
The boughs cracked, and the leaves torn away by cartloads went down the cavernous throats of the vast brutes.
So, then, the dream in which I had had a vision of the prehistoric world, of the tertiary and post-tertiary periods, was now realised.
And there we were alone, in the bowels of the earth, at the mercy of its wild inhabitants!
My uncle was gazing with intense and eager interest.
"Come on!"
said he, seizing my arm.
"Forward!
forward!"
"No, I will not!"
I cried.
"We have no firearms.
What could we do in the midst of a herd of these four-footed giants?
Come away, uncle - come!
No human being may with safety dare the anger of these monstrous beasts."
"No human creature?"
replied my uncle in a lower voice.
"You are wrong, Axel.
Look, look down there!
I fancy I see a living creature similar to ourselves: it is a man!"
I looked, shaking my head incredulously.
But though at first I was unbelieving I had to yield to the evidence of my senses.
In fact, at a distance of a quarter of a mile, leaning against the trunk of a gigantic kauri, stood a human being, the Proteus of those subterranean regions, a new son of Neptune, watching this countless herd of mastodons.
Immanis pecoris custos, immanior ipse.
[1]
Yes, truly, huger still himself. It was no longer a fossil being like him whose dried remains we had easily lifted up in the field of bones; it was a giant, able to control those monsters. In stature he was at least twelve feet high.
His head, huge and unshapely as a buffalo's, was half hidden in the thick and tangled growth of his unkempt hair.
It most resembled the mane of the primitive elephant.
In his hand he wielded with ease an enormous bough, a staff worthy of this shepherd of the geologic period.
We stood petrified and speechless with amazement.
But he might see us!
We must fly!
"Come, do come!"
I said to my uncle, who for once allowed himself to be persuaded.
In another quarter of an hour our nimble heels had carried us beyond the reach of this horrible monster.
And yet, now that I can reflect quietly, now that my spirit has grown calm again, now that months have slipped by since this strange and supernatural meeting, what am I to think? what am I to believe?
I must conclude that it was impossible that our senses had been deceived, that our eyes did not see what we supposed they saw.
No human being lives in this subterranean world; no generation of men dwells in those inferior caverns of the globe, unknown to and unconnected with the inhabitants of its surface.
It is absurd to believe it!
I had rather admit that it may have been some animal whose structure resembled the human, some ape or baboon of the early geological ages, some protopitheca, or some mesopitheca, some early or middle ape like that discovered by Mr. Lartet in the bone cave of Sansau.
But this creature surpassed in stature all the measurements known in modern palaeontology.
But that a man, a living man, and therefore whole generations doubtless besides, should be buried there in the bowels of the earth, is impossible.
However, we had left behind us the luminous forest, dumb with astonishment, overwhelmed and struck down with a terror which amounted to stupefaction. We kept running on for fear the horrible monster might be on our track.
It was a flight, a fall, like that fearful pulling and dragging which is peculiar to nightmare.
Instinctively we got back to the Liedenbrock sea, and I cannot say into what vagaries my mind would not have carried me but for a circumstance which brought me back to practical matters.
Although I was certain that we were now treading upon a soil not hitherto touched by our feet, I often perceived groups of rocks which reminded me of those about Port Graeuben.
Besides, this seemed to confirm the indications of the needle, and to show that we had against our will returned to the north of the Liedenbrock sea.
Occasionally we felt quite convinced.
Brooks and waterfalls were tumbling everywhere from the projections in the rocks.
I thought I recognised the bed of surturbrand, our faithful Hansbach, and the grotto in which I had recovered life and consciousness.
Then a few paces farther on, the arrangement of the cliffs, the appearance of an unrecognised stream, or the strange outline of a rock, came to throw me again into doubt.
I communicated my doubts to my uncle.
Like myself, he hesitated; he could recognise nothing again amidst this monotonous scene.
"Evidently," said I, "we have not landed again at our original starting point, but the storm has carried us a little higher, and if we follow the shore we shall find Port Graeuben."
"If that is the case it will be useless to continue our exploration, and we had better return to our raft.
But, Axel, are you not mistaken?"
"It is difficult to speak decidedly, uncle, for all these rocks are so very much alike. Yet I think I recognise the promontory at the foot of which Hans constructed our launch.
We must be very near the little port, if indeed this is not it," I added, examining a creek which I thought I recognised.
"No, Axel, we should at least find our own traces and I see nothing - "
"But I do see," I cried, darting upon an object lying on the sand.
And I showed my uncle a rusty dagger which I had just picked up.
"Come," said he, "had you this weapon with you?"
"I!
No, certainly!
But you, perhaps - "
"Not that I am aware," said the Professor.
"I have never had this object in my possession."
"Well, this is strange!"
"No, Axel, it is very simple.
The Icelanders often wear arms of this kind.
This must have belonged to Hans, and he has lost it."
I shook my head.
Hans had never had an object like this in his possession.
"Did it not belong to some pre-adamite warrior?"
I cried, "to some living man, contemporary with the huge cattle-driver?
But no.
This is not a relic of the stone age.
It is not even of the iron age.
This blade is steel - "
My uncle stopped me abruptly on my way to a dissertation which would have taken me a long way, and said coolly:
"Be calm, Axel, and reasonable. This dagger belongs to the sixteenth century; it is a poniard, such as gentlemen carried in their belts to give the coup de grace. Its origin is Spanish.
It was never either yours, or mine, or the hunter's, nor did it belong to any of those human beings who may or may not inhabit this inner world.
See, it was never jagged like this by cutting men's throats; its blade is coated with a rust neither a day, nor a year, nor a hundred years old."
The Professor was getting excited according to his wont, and was allowing his imagination to run away with him.
"Axel, we are on the way towards the grand discovery.
This blade has been left on the strand for from one to three hundred years, and has blunted its edge upon the rocks that fringe this subterranean sea!"
"But it has not come alone.
It has not twisted itself out of shape; some one has been here before us!
"Yes - a man has."
"And who was that man?"
"A man who has engraved his name somewhere with that dagger.
That man wanted once more to mark the way to the centre of the earth.
Let us look about: look about!"
And, wonderfully interested, we peered all along the high wall, peeping into every fissure which might open out into a gallery.
And so we arrived at a place where the shore was much narrowed.
Here the sea came to lap the foot of the steep cliff, leaving a passage no wider than a couple of yards.
Between two boldly projecting rocks appeared the mouth of a dark tunnel.
There, upon a granite slab, appeared two mysterious graven letters, half eaten away by time.
They were the initials of the bold and daring traveller:
[Runic initials appear here]
"A. S.," shouted my uncle.
"Arne Saknussemm!
Arne Saknussemm everywhere!"
Since the start upon this marvellous pilgrimage I had been through so many astonishments that I might well be excused for thinking myself well hardened against any further surprise.
Yet at the sight of these two letters, engraved on this spot three hundred years ago, I stood aghast in dumb amazement.
Not only were the initials of the learned alchemist visible upon the living rock, but there lay the iron point with which the letters had been engraved.
I could no longer doubt of the existence of that wonderful traveller and of the fact of his unparalleled journey, without the most glaring incredulity.
Whilst these reflections were occupying me, Professor Liedenbrock had launched into a somewhat rhapsodical eulogium, of which Arne Saknussemm was, of course, the hero.
"Thou marvellous genius!" he cried, "thou hast not forgotten one indication which might serve to lay open to mortals the road through the terrestrial crust; and thy fellow-creatures may even now, after the lapse of three centuries, again trace thy footsteps through these deep and darksome ways.
You reserved the contemplation of these wonders for other eyes besides your own.
Your name, graven from stage to stage, leads the bold follower of your footsteps to the very centre of our planet's core, and there again we shall find your own name written with your own hand.
I too will inscribe my name upon this dark granite page.
But for ever henceforth let this cape that advances into the sea discovered by yourself be known by your own illustrious name - Cape Saknussemm."
Such were the glowing words of panegyric which fell upon my attentive ear, and I could not resist the sentiment of enthusiasm with which I too was infected. The fire of zeal kindled afresh in me. I forgot everything.
I dismissed from my mind the past perils of the journey, the future danger of our return.
That which another had done I supposed we might also do, and nothing that was not superhuman appeared impossible to me.
"Forward!
forward!"
I cried.
I was already darting down the gloomy tunnel when the Professor stopped me; he, the man of impulse, counselled patience and coolness.
"Let us first return to Hans," he said, "and bring the raft to this spot."
I obeyed, not without dissatisfaction, and passed out rapidly among the rocks on the shore.
I said: "Uncle, do you know it seems to me that circumstances have wonderfully befriended us hitherto?"
"You think so, Axel?"
"No doubt; even the tempest has put us on the right way. Blessings on that storm! It has brought us back to this coast from which fine weather would have carried us far away. Suppose we had touched with our prow (the prow of a rudder!)
the southern shore of the Liedenbrock sea, what would have become of us?
We should never have seen the name of Saknussemm, and we should at this moment be imprisoned on a rockbound, impassable coast."
"Yes, Axel, it is providential that whilst supposing we were steering south we should have just got back north at Cape Saknussemm.
I must say that this is astonishing, and that I feel I have no way to explain it."
"What does that signify, uncle?
Our business is not to explain facts, but to use them!"
"Certainly; but - "
"Well, uncle, we are going to resume the northern route, and to pass under the north countries of Europe - under Sweden, Russia, Siberia: who knows where? - instead of burrowing under the deserts of Africa, or perhaps the waves of the Atlantic; and that is all I want to know."
"Yes, Axel, you are right.
It is all for the best, since we have left that weary, horizontal sea, which led us nowhere.
Now we shall go down, down, down!
Do you know that it is now only 1,500 leagues to the centre of the globe?"
"Is that all?"
I cried.
"Why, that's nothing.
Let us start: march!"
All this crazy talk was going on still when we met the hunter.
Everything was made ready for our instant departure.
Every bit of cordage was put on board.
We took our places, and with our sail set, Hans steered us along the coast to Cape Saknussemm.
The wind was unfavourable to a species of launch not calculated for shallow water. In many places we were obliged to push ourselves along with iron-pointed sticks. Often the sunken rocks just beneath the surface obliged us to deviate from our straight course.
At last, after three hours' sailing, about six in the evening we reached a place suitable for our landing.
I jumped ashore, followed by my uncle and the Icelander.
This short passage had not served to cool my ardour.
On the contrary, I even proposed to burn 'our ship,' to prevent the possibility of return; but my uncle would not consent to that.
I thought him singularly lukewarm.
"At least," I said, "don't let us lose a minute."
"Yes, yes, lad," he replied; "but first let us examine this new gallery, to see if we shall require our ladders."
My uncle put his Ruhmkorff's apparatus in action; the raft moored to the shore was left alone; the mouth of the tunnel was not twenty yards from us; and our party, with myself at the head, made for it without a moment's delay.
The aperture, which was almost round, was about five feet in diameter; the dark passage was cut out in the live rock and lined with a coat of the eruptive matter which formerly issued from it; the interior was level with the ground outside, so that we were able to enter without difficulty.
We were following a horizontal plane, when, only six paces in, our progress was interrupted by an enormous block just across our way.
"Accursed rock!"
I cried in a passion, finding myself suddenly confronted by an impassable obstacle.
Right and left we searched in vain for a way, up and down, side to side; there was no getting any farther. I felt fearfully disappointed, and I would not admit that the obstacle was final. I stopped, I looked underneath the block: no opening. Above: granite still.
Hans passed his lamp over every portion of the barrier in vain.
We must give up all hope of passing it.
I sat down in despair.
My uncle strode from side to side in the narrow passage.
"But how was it with Saknussemm?"
I cried.
"Yes," said my uncle, "was he stopped by this stone barrier?"
"No, no," I replied with animation. "This fragment of rock has been shaken down by some shock or convulsion, or by one of those magnetic storms which agitate these regions, and has blocked up the passage which lay open to him.
Many years have elapsed since the return of Saknussemm to the surface and the fall of this huge fragment.
Is it not evident that this gallery was once the way open to the course of the lava, and that at that time there must have been a free passage?
See here are recent fissures grooving and channelling the granite roof.
This roof itself is formed of fragments of rock carried down, of enormous stones, as if by some giant's hand; but at one time the expulsive force was greater than usual, and this block, like the falling keystone of a ruined arch, has slipped down to the ground and blocked up the way.
It is only an accidental obstruction, not met by Saknussemm, and if we don't destroy it we shall be unworthy to reach the centre of the earth."
Such was my sentence! The soul of the Professor had passed into me. The genius of discovery possessed me wholly. I forgot the past, I scorned the future.
I gave not a thought to the things of the surface of this globe into which I had dived; its cities and its sunny plains, Hamburg and the Koenigstrasse, even poor Graeuben, who must have given us up for lost, all were for the time dismissed from the pages of my memory.
"Well," cried my uncle, "let us make a way with our pickaxes."
"Too hard for the pickaxe."
"Well, then, the spade."
"That would take us too long."
"What, then?"
"Why gunpowder, to be sure!
Let us mine the obstacle and blow it up."
"Oh, yes, it is only a bit of rock to blast!"
"Hans, to work!"
cried my uncle.
The Icelander returned to the raft and soon came back with an iron bar which he made use of to bore a hole for the charge. This was no easy work.
A hole was to be made large enough to hold fifty pounds of guncotton, whose expansive force is four times that of gunpowder.
I was terribly excited.
Whilst Hans was at work I was actively helping my uncle to prepare a slow match of wetted powder encased in linen.
"This will do it," I said.
"It will," replied my uncle.
By midnight our mining preparations were over; the charge was rammed into the hole, and the slow match uncoiled along the gallery showed its end outside the opening.
A spark would now develop the whole of our preparations into activity.
"To-morrow," said the Professor.
I had to be resigned and to wait six long hours.
The next day, Thursday, August 27, is a well-remembered date in our subterranean journey. It never returns to my memory without sending through me a shudder of horror and a palpitation of the heart.
From that hour we had no further occasion for the exercise of reason, or judgment, or skill, or contrivance.
We were henceforth to be hurled along, the playthings of the fierce elements of the deep.
At six we were afoot.
The moment drew near to clear a way by blasting through the opposing mass of granite.
I begged for the honour of lighting the fuse.
This duty done, I was to join my companions on the raft, which had not yet been unloaded; we should then push off as far as we could and avoid the dangers arising from the explosion, the effects of which were not likely to be confined to the rock itself.
The fuse was calculated to burn ten minutes before setting fire to the mine.
I therefore had sufficient time to get away to the raft.
I prepared to fulfil my task with some anxiety.
After a hasty meal, my uncle and the hunter embarked whilst I remained on shore. I was supplied with a lighted lantern to set fire to the fuse. "Now go," said my uncle, "and return immediately to us." "Don't be uneasy," I replied. "I will not play by the way."
I immediately proceeded to the mouth of the tunnel.
I opened my lantern.
I laid hold of the end of the match.
The Professor stood, chronometer in hand. "
Ready?"
he cried.
"Ay."
"Fire!"
I instantly plunged the end of the fuse into the lantern.
It spluttered and flamed, and I ran at the top of my speed to the raft.
"Come on board quickly, and let us push off."
Hans, with a vigorous thrust, sent us from the shore.
The raft shot twenty fathoms out to sea.
It was a moment of intense excitement.
The Professor was watching the hand of the chronometer.
"Five minutes more!"
he said.
"Four!
Three!"
My pulse beat half-seconds.
"Two!
One!
Down, granite rocks; down with you."
What took place at that moment? I believe I did not hear the dull roar of the explosion. But the rocks suddenly assumed a new arrangement: they rent asunder like a curtain. I saw a bottomless pit open on the shore.
The sea, lashed into sudden fury, rose up in an enormous billow, on the ridge of which the unhappy raft was uplifted bodily in the air with all its crew and cargo.
We all three fell down flat. In less than a second we were in deep, unfathomable darkness. Then I felt as if not only myself but the raft also had no support beneath. I thought it was sinking; but it was not so.
I wanted to speak to my uncle, but the roaring of the waves prevented him from hearing even the sound of my voice.
In spite of darkness, noise, astonishment, and terror, I then understood what had taken place.
On the other side of the blown-up rock was an abyss.
The explosion had caused a kind of earthquake in this fissured and abysmal region; a great gulf had opened; and the sea, now changed into a torrent, was hurrying us along into it.
I gave myself up for lost.
An hour passed away - two hours, perhaps - I cannot tell. We clutched each other fast, to save ourselves from being thrown off the raft. We felt violent shocks whenever we were borne heavily against the craggy projections.
Yet these shocks were not very frequent, from which I concluded that the gully was widening.
It was no doubt the same road that Saknussemm had taken; but instead of walking peaceably down it, as he had done, we were carrying a whole sea along with us.
These ideas, it will be understood, presented themselves to my mind in a vague and undetermined form. I had difficulty in associating any ideas together during this headlong race, which seemed like a vertical descent.
To judge by the air which was whistling past me and made a whizzing in my ears, we were moving faster than the fastest express trains.
To light a torch under these' conditions would have been impossible; and our last electric apparatus had been shattered by the force of the explosion.
I was therefore much surprised to see a clear light shining near me. It lighted up the calm and unmoved countenance of Hans.
The skilful huntsman had succeeded in lighting the lantern; and although it flickered so much as to threaten to go out, it threw a fitful light across the awful darkness.
I was right in my supposition. It was a wide gallery. The dim light could not show us both its walls at once. The fall of the waters which were carrying us away exceeded that of the swiftest rapids in American rivers.
Its surface seemed composed of a sheaf of arrows hurled with inconceivable force; I cannot convey my impressions by a better comparison.
The raft, occasionally seized by an eddy, spun round as it still flew along.
When it approached the walls of the gallery I threw on them the light of the lantern, and I could judge somewhat of the velocity of our speed by noticing how the jagged projections of the rocks spun into endless ribbons and bands, so that we seemed confined within a network of shifting lines.
I supposed we were running at the rate of thirty leagues an hour.
My uncle and I gazed on each other with haggard eyes, clinging to the stump of the mast, which had snapped asunder at the first shock of our great catastrophe.
We kept our backs to the wind, not to be stifled by the rapidity of a movement which no human power could check.
Hours passed away.
No change in our situation; but a discovery came to complicate matters and make them worse.
In seeking to put our cargo into somewhat better order, I found that the greater part of the articles embarked had disappeared at the moment of the explosion, when the sea broke in upon us with such violence.
I wanted to know exactly what we had saved, and with the lantern in my hand I began my examination.
Of our instruments none were saved but the compass and the chronometer; our stock of ropes and ladders was reduced to the bit of cord rolled round the stump of the mast!
Not a spade, not a pickaxe, not a hammer was left us; and, irreparable disaster!
we had only one day's provisions left.
I searched every nook and corner, every crack and cranny in the raft.
There was nothing.
Our provisions were reduced to one bit of salt meat and a few biscuits.
I stared at our failing supplies stupidly. I refused to take in the gravity of our loss. And yet what was the use of troubling myself.
If we had had provisions enough for months, how could we get out of the abyss into which we were being hurled by an irresistible torrent?
Why should we fear the horrors of famine, when death was swooping down upon us in a multitude of other forms?
Would there be time left to die of starvation?
Yet by an inexplicable play of the imagination I forgot my present dangers, to contemplate the threatening future. Was there any chance of escaping from the fury of this impetuous torrent, and of returning to the surface of the globe? I could not form the slightest conjecture how or when.
But one chance in a thousand, or ten thousand, is still a chance; whilst death from starvation would leave us not the smallest hope in the world.
The thought came into my mind to declare the whole truth to my uncle, to show him the dreadful straits to which we were reduced, and to calculate how long we might yet expect to live. But I had the courage to preserve silence.
I wished to leave him cool and self-possessed.
At that moment the light from our lantern began to sink by little and little, and then went out entirely. The wick had burnt itself out. Black night reigned again; and there was no hope left of being able to dissipate the palpable darkness.
We had yet a torch left, but we could not have kept it alight.
Then, like a child, I closed my eyes firmly, not to see the darkness.
After a considerable lapse of time our speed redoubled. I could perceive it by the sharpness of the currents that blew past my face. The descent became steeper. I believe we were no longer sliding, but falling down. I had an impression that we were dropping vertically.
My uncle's hand, and the vigorous arm of Hans, held me fast.
Suddenly, after a space of time that I could not measure, I felt a shock. The raft had not struck against any hard resistance, but had suddenly been checked in its fall. A waterspout, an immense liquid column, was beating upon the surface of the waters. I was suffocating!
I was drowning!
But this sudden flood was not of long duration.
In a few seconds I found myself in the air again, which I inhaled with all the force of my lungs.
My uncle and Hans were still holding me fast by the arms; and the raft was still carrying us.
It might have been, as I guessed, about ten at night. The first of my senses which came into play after this last bout was that of hearing. All at once I could hear; and it was a real exercise of the sense of hearing.
I could hear the silence in the gallery after the din which for hours had stunned me.
At last these words of my uncle's came to me like a vague murmuring:
"We are going up."
"What do you mean?"
I cried.
"Yes, we are going up - up!"
I stretched out my arm.
I touched the wall, and drew back my hand bleeding.
We were ascending with extreme rapidity.
"The torch!
The torch!"
cried the Professor.
Not without difficulty Hans succeeded in lighting the torch; and the flame, preserving its upward tendency, threw enough light to show us what kind of a place we were in.
"Just as I thought," said the Professor "We are in a tunnel not four-and-twenty feet in diameter.
The water had reached the bottom of the gulf.
It is now rising to its level, and carrying us with it."
"Where to?"
"I cannot tell; but we must be ready for anything.
We are mounting at a speed which seems to me of fourteen feet in a second, or ten miles an hour.
At this rate we shall get on."
"Yes, if nothing stops us; if this well has an aperture.
But suppose it to be stopped.
If the air is condensed by the pressure of this column of water we shall be crushed."
"Axel," replied the Professor with perfect coolness, "our situation is almost desperate; but there are some chances of deliverance, and it is these that I am considering. If at every instant we may perish, so at every instant we may be saved.
Let us then be prepared to seize upon the smallest advantage."
"But what shall we do now?"
"Recruit our strength by eating."
At these words I fixed a haggard eye upon my uncle.
That which I had been so unwilling to confess at last had to be told.
"Eat, did you say?"
"Yes, at once."
The Professor added a few words in Danish, but Hans shook his head mournfully.
"What!"
cried my uncle.
"Have we lost our provisions?"
"Yes; here is all we have left; one bit of salt meat for the three."
My uncle stared at me as if he could not understand.
"Well," said I, "do you think we have any chance of being saved?"
My question was unanswered.
An hour passed away.
I began to feel the pangs of a violent hunger.
My companions were suffering too, and not one of us dared touch this wretched remnant of our goodly store.
But now we were mounting up with excessive speed. Sometimes the air would cut our breath short, as is experienced by aeronauts ascending too rapidly. But whilst they suffer from cold in proportion to their rise, we were beginning to feel a contrary effect.
The heat was increasing in a manner to cause us the most fearful anxiety, and certainly the temperature was at this moment at the height of 100 deg.
Fahr.
What could be the meaning of such a change?
Up to this time facts had supported the theories of Davy and of Liedenbrock; until now particular conditions of non-conducting rocks, electricity and magnetism, had tempered the laws of nature, giving us only a moderately warm climate, for the theory of a central fire remained in my estimation the only one that was true and explicable.
Were we then turning back to where the phenomena of central heat ruled in all their rigour and would reduce the most refractory rocks to the state of a molten liquid?
I feared this, and said to the Professor:
"If we are neither drowned, nor shattered to pieces, nor starved to death, there is still the chance that we may be burned alive and reduced to ashes."
At this he shrugged his shoulders and returned to his thoughts.
Another hour passed, and, except some slight increase in the temperature, nothing new had happened.
"Come," said he, "we must determine upon something."
"Determine on what?"
said I.
"Yes, we must recruit our strength by carefully rationing ourselves, and so prolong our existence by a few hours.
But we shall be reduced to very great weakness at last."
"And our last hour is not far off."
"Well, if there is a chance of safety, if a moment for active exertion presents itself, where should we find the required strength if we allowed ourselves to be enfeebled by hunger?"
"Well, uncle, when this bit of meat has been devoured what shall we have left?"
"Nothing, Axel, nothing at all.
But will it do you any more good to devour it with your eyes than with your teeth?
Your reasoning has in it neither sense nor energy."
"Then don't you despair?"
I cried irritably.
"No, certainly not," was the Professor's firm reply.
"What!
do you think there is any chance of safety left?"
"Yes, I do; as long as the heart beats, as long as body and soul keep together, I cannot admit that any creature endowed with a will has need to despair of life."
Resolute words these!
The man who could speak so, under such circumstances, was of no ordinary type.
"Finally, what do you mean to do?"
I asked.
"Eat what is left to the last crumb, and recruit our fading strength.
This meal will be our last, perhaps: so let it be!
But at any rate we shall once more be men, and not exhausted, empty bags."
"Well, let us consume it then," I cried.
My uncle took the piece of meat and the few biscuits which had escaped from the general destruction. He divided them into three equal portions and gave one to each. This made about a pound of nourishment for each. The Professor ate his greedily, with a kind of feverish rage.
I ate without pleasure, almost with disgust; Hans quietly, moderately, masticating his small mouthfuls without any noise, and relishing them with the calmness of a man above all anxiety about the future.
By diligent search he had found a flask of Hollands; he offered it to us each in turn, and this generous beverage cheered us up slightly.
"Fortraefflig," said Hans, drinking in his turn.
"Excellent," replied my uncle.
A glimpse of hope had returned, although without cause.
But our last meal was over, and it was now five in the morning.
Man is so constituted that health is a purely negative state.
Hunger once satisfied, it is difficult for a man to imagine the horrors of starvation; they cannot be understood without being felt.
Therefore it was that after our long fast these few mouthfuls of meat and biscuit made us triumph over our past agonies.
But as soon as the meal was done, we each of us fell deep into thought.
What was Hans thinking of - that man of the far West, but who seemed ruled by the fatalist doctrines of the East?
As for me, my thoughts were made up of remembrances, and they carried me up to the surface of the globe of which I ought never to have taken leave.
The house in the Koenigstrasse, my poor dear Graeuben, that kind soul Martha, flitted like visions before my eyes, and in the dismal moanings which from time to time reached my ears I thought I could distinguish the roar of the traffic of the great cities upon earth.
My uncle still had his eye upon his work. Torch in hand, he tried to gather some idea of our situation from the observation of the strata.
This calculation could, at best, be but a vague approximation; but a learned man is always a philosopher when he succeeds in remaining cool, and assuredly Professor Liedenbrock possessed this quality to a surprising degree.
I could hear him murmuring geological terms.
I could understand them, and in spite of myself I felt interested in this last geological study.
"Eruptive granite," he was saying.
"We are still in the primitive period.
But we are going up, up, higher still.
Who can tell?"
Ah!
who can tell?
With his hand he was examining the perpendicular wall, and in a few more minutes he continued:
"This is gneiss!
here is mica schist!
Ah!
presently we shall come to the transition period, and then - "
What did the Professor mean?
Could he be trying to measure the thickness of the crust of the earth that lay between us and the world above?
Had he any means of making this calculation?
No, he had not the aneroid, and no guessing could supply its place.
Still the temperature kept rising, and I felt myself steeped in a broiling atmosphere. I could only compare it to the heat of a furnace at the moment when the molten metal is running into the mould.
Gradually we had been obliged to throw aside our coats and waistcoats, the lightest covering became uncomfortable and even painful.
"Are we rising into a fiery furnace?"
I cried at one moment when the heat was redoubling.
"No," replied my uncle, "that is impossible - quite impossible!"
"Yet," I answered, feeling the wall, "this well is burning hot."
At the same moment, touching the water, I had to withdraw my hand in haste.
"The water is scalding," I cried.
This time the Professor's only answer was an angry gesture.
Then an unconquerable terror seized upon me, from which I could no longer get free. I felt that a catastrophe was approaching before which the boldest spirit must quail. A dim, vague notion laid hold of my mind, but which was fast hardening into certainty.
I tried to repel it, but it would return.
I dared not express it in plain terms.
Yet a few involuntary observations confirmed me in my view.
By the flickering light of the torch I could distinguish contortions in the granite beds; a phenomenon was unfolding in which electricity would play the principal part; then this unbearable heat, this boiling water!
I consulted the compass.
The compass had lost its properties!
it had ceased to act properly!
Yes: our compass was no longer a guide; the needle flew from pole to pole with a kind of frenzied impulse; it ran round the dial, and spun hither and thither as if it were giddy or intoxicated.
I knew quite well that according to the best received theories the mineral covering of the globe is never at absolute rest; the changes brought about by the chemical decomposition of its component parts, the agitation caused by great liquid torrents, and the magnetic currents, are continually tending to disturb it - even when living beings upon its surface may fancy that all is quiet below.
A phenomenon of this kind would not have greatly alarmed me, or at any rate it would not have given rise to dreadful apprehensions.
But other facts, other circumstances, of a peculiar nature, came to reveal to me by degrees the true state of the case. There came incessant and continuous explosions.
I could only compare them to the loud rattle of a long train of chariots driven at full speed over the stones, or a roar of unintermitting thunder.
Then the disordered compass, thrown out of gear by the electric currents, confirmed me in a growing conviction.
The mineral crust of the globe threatened to burst up, the granite foundations to come together with a crash, the fissure through which we were helplessly driven would be filled up, the void would be full of crushed fragments of rock, and we poor wretched mortals were to be buried and annihilated in this dreadful consummation.
"My uncle," I cried, "we are lost now, utterly lost!"
"What are you in a fright about now?"
was the calm rejoinder.
"What is the matter with you?"
"The matter? Look at those quaking walls! look at those shivering rocks. Don't you feel the burning heat? Don't you see how the water boils and bubbles? Are you blind to the dense vapours and steam growing thicker and denser every minute? See this agitated compass needle.
It is an earthquake that is threatening us."
My undaunted uncle calmly shook his head.
"Do you think," said he, "an earthquake is coming?"
"I do."
"Well, I think you are mistaken."
"What!
don't you recognise the symptoms?"
"Of an earthquake?
no!
I am looking out for something better."
"What can you mean?
Explain?"
"It is an eruption, Axel."
"An eruption!
Do you mean to affirm that we are running up the shaft of a volcano?"
"I believe we are," said the indomitable Professor with an air of perfect self-possession; "and it is the best thing that could possibly happen to us under our circumstances."
The best thing!
Was my uncle stark mad?
What did the man mean?
and what was the use of saying facetious things at a time like this?
"What!" I shouted. "Are we being taken up in an eruption?
Our fate has flung us here among burning lavas, molten rocks, boiling waters, and all kinds of volcanic matter; we are going to be pitched out, expelled, tossed up, vomited, spit out high into the air, along with fragments of rock, showers of ashes and scoria, in the midst of a towering rush of smoke and flames; and it is the best thing that could happen to us!"
"Yes," replied the Professor, eyeing me over his spectacles, "I don't see any other way of reaching the surface of the earth."
I pass rapidly over the thousand ideas which passed through my mind.
My uncle was right, undoubtedly right; and never had he seemed to me more daring and more confirmed in his notions than at this moment when he was calmly contemplating the chances of being shot out of a volcano!
In the meantime up we went; the night passed away in continual ascent; the din and uproar around us became more and more intensified; I was stifled and stunned; I thought my last hour was approaching; and yet imagination is such a strong thing that even in this supreme hour I was occupied with strange and almost childish speculations.
But I was the victim, not the master, of my own thoughts.
It was very evident that we were being hurried upward upon the crest of a wave of eruption; beneath our raft were boiling waters, and under these the more sluggish lava was working its way up in a heated mass, together with shoals of fragments of rock which, when they arrived at the crater, would be dispersed in all directions high and low.
We were imprisoned in the shaft or chimney of some volcano.
There was no room to doubt of that.
But this time, instead of Snaefell, an extinct volcano, we were inside one in full activity.
I wondered, therefore, where could this mountain be, and in what part of the world we were to be shot out.
I made no doubt but that it would be in some northern region. Before its disorders set in, the needle had never deviated from that direction. From Cape Saknussemm we had been carried due north for hundreds of leagues. Were we under Iceland again?
Were we destined to be thrown up out of Hecla, or by which of the seven other fiery craters in that island?
Within a radius of five hundred leagues to the west I remembered under this parallel of latitude only the imperfectly known volcanoes of the north-east coast of America.
To the east there was only one in the 80th degree of north latitude, the Esk in Jan Mayen Island, not far from Spitzbergen!
Certainly there was no lack of craters, and there were some capacious enough to throw out a whole army!
But I wanted to know which of them was to serve us for an exit from the inner world.
Towards morning the ascending movement became accelerated. If the heat increased, instead of diminishing, as we approached nearer to the surface of the globe, this effect was due to local causes alone, and those volcanic. The manner of our locomotion left no doubt in my mind.
An enormous force, a force of hundreds of atmospheres, generated by the extreme pressure of confined vapours, was driving us irresistibly forward.
But to what numberless dangers it exposed us!
Soon lurid lights began to penetrate the vertical gallery which widened as we went up.
Right and left I could see deep channels, like huge tunnels, out of which escaped dense volumes of smoke; tongues of fire lapped the walls, which crackled and sputtered under the intense heat.
"See, see, my uncle!"
I cried.
"Well, those are only sulphureous flames and vapours, which one must expect to see in an eruption.
They are quite natural."
"But suppose they should wrap us round."
"But they won't wrap us round."
"But we shall be stifled."
"We shall not be stifled at all.
The gallery is widening, and if it becomes necessary, we shall abandon the raft, and creep into a crevice."
"But the water - the rising water?"
"There is no more water, Axel; only a lava paste, which is bearing us up on its surface to the top of the crater."
The liquid column had indeed disappeared, to give place to dense and still boiling eruptive matter of all kinds. The temperature was becoming unbearable. A thermometer exposed to this atmosphere would have marked 150 deg.. The perspiration streamed from my body.
But for the rapidity of our ascent we should have been suffocated.
But the Professor gave up his idea of abandoning the raft, and it was well he did.
However roughly joined together, those planks afforded us a firmer support than we could have found anywhere else.
About eight in the morning a new incident occurred.
The upward movement ceased.
The raft lay motionless.
"What is this?"
I asked, shaken by this sudden stoppage as if by a shock.
"It is a halt," replied my uncle.
"Is the eruption checked?"
I asked.
"I hope not."
I rose, and tried to look around me.
Perhaps the raft itself, stopped in its course by a projection, was staying the volcanic torrent.
If this were the case we should have to release it as soon as possible.
But it was not so.
The blast of ashes, scorix, and rubbish had ceased to rise.
"Has the eruption stopped?"
I cried.
"Ah!"
said my uncle between his clenched teeth, "you are afraid.
But don't alarm yourself - this lull cannot last long.
It has lasted now five minutes, and in a short time we shall resume our journey to the mouth of the crater."
As he spoke, the Professor continued to consult his chronometer, and he was again right in his prognostications.
The raft was soon hurried and driven forward with a rapid but irregular movement, which lasted about ten minutes, and then stopped again.
"Very good," said my uncle; "in ten minutes more we shall be off again, for our present business lies with an intermittent volcano.
It gives us time now and then to take breath."
This was perfectly true.
When the ten minutes were over we started off again with renewed and increased speed.
We were obliged to lay fast hold of the planks of the raft, not to be thrown off.
Then again the paroxysm was over.
I have since reflected upon this singular phenomenon without being able to explain it.
At any rate it was clear that we were not in the main shaft of the volcano, but in a lateral gallery where there were felt recurrent tunes of reaction.
How often this operation was repeated I cannot say. All I know is, that at each fresh impulse we were hurled forward with a greatly increased force, and we seemed as if we were mere projectiles.
During the short halts we were stifled with the heat; whilst we were being projected forward the hot air almost stopped my breath.
I thought for a moment how delightful it would be to find myself carried suddenly into the arctic regions, with a cold 30 deg.
below the freezing point.
My overheated brain conjured up visions of white plains of cool snow, where I might roll and allay my feverish heat.
Little by little my brain, weakened by so many constantly repeated shocks, seemed to be giving way altogether.
But for the strong arm of Hans I should more than once have had my head broken against the granite roof of our burning dungeon.
I have therefore no exact recollection of what took place during the following hours. I have a confused impression left of continuous explosions, loud detonations, a general shaking of the rocks all around us, and of a spinning movement with which our raft was once whirled helplessly round.
It rocked upon the lava torrent, amidst a dense fall of ashes.
Snorting flames darted their fiery tongues at us.
There were wild, fierce puffs of stormy wind from below, resembling the blasts of vast iron furnaces blowing all at one time; and I caught a glimpse of the figure of Hans lighted up by the fire; and all the feeling I had left was just what I imagine must be the feeling of an unhappy criminal doomed to be blown away alive from the mouth of a cannon, just before the trigger is pulled, and the flying limbs and rags of flesh and skin fill the quivering air and spatter the blood-stained ground.
When I opened my eyes again I felt myself grasped by the belt with the strong hand of our guide. With the other arm he supported my uncle. I was not seriously hurt, but I was shaken and bruised and battered all over.
I found myself lying on the sloping side of a mountain only two yards from a gaping gulf, which would have swallowed me up had I leaned at all that way.
Hans had saved me from death whilst I lay rolling on the edge of the crater.
"Where are we?"
asked my uncle irascibly, as if he felt much injured by being landed upon the earth again.
The hunter shook his head in token of complete ignorance.
"Is it Iceland?"
I asked.
"Nej," replied Hans.
"What!
Not Iceland?"
cried the Professor.
"Hans must be mistaken," I said, raising myself up.
This was our final surprise after all the astonishing events of our wonderful journey.
I expected to see a white cone covered with the eternal snow of ages rising from the midst of the barren deserts of the icy north, faintly lighted with the pale rays of the arctic sun, far away in the highest latitudes known; but contrary to all our expectations, my uncle, the Icelander, and myself were sitting half-way down a mountain baked under the burning rays of a southern sun, which was blistering us with the heat, and blinding us with the fierce light of his nearly vertical rays.
I could not believe my own eyes; but the heated air and the sensation of burning left me no room for doubt.
We had come out of the crater half naked, and the radiant orb to which we had been strangers for two months was lavishing upon us out of his blazing splendours more of his light and heat than we were able to receive with comfort.
When my eyes had become accustomed to the bright light to which they had been so long strangers, I began to use them to set my imagination right.
At least I would have it to be Spitzbergen, and I was in no humour to give up this notion.
The Professor was the first to speak, and said:
"Well, this is not much like Iceland."
"But is it Jan Mayen?"
I asked.
"Nor that either," he answered.
"This is no northern mountain; here are no granite peaks capped with snow.
Look, Axel, look!"
Above our heads, at a height of five hundred feet or more, we saw the crater of a volcano, through which, at intervals of fifteen minutes or so, there issued with loud explosions lofty columns of fire, mingled with pumice stones, ashes, and flowing lava.
I could feel the heaving of the mountain, which seemed to breathe like a huge whale, and puff out fire and wind from its vast blowholes.
Beneath, down a pretty steep declivity, ran streams of lava for eight or nine hundred feet, giving the mountain a height of about 1,300 or 1,400 feet.
But the base of the mountain was hidden in a perfect bower of rich verdure, amongst which I was able to distinguish the olive, the fig, and vines, covered with their luscious purple bunches.
I was forced to confess that there was nothing arctic here.
When the eye passed beyond these green surroundings it rested on a wide, blue expanse of sea or lake, which appeared to enclose this enchanting island, within a compass of only a few leagues.
Eastward lay a pretty little white seaport town or village, with a few houses scattered around it, and in the harbour of which a few vessels of peculiar rig were gently swayed by the softly swelling waves.
Beyond it, groups of islets rose from the smooth, blue waters, but in such numbers that they seemed to dot the sea like a shoal.
To the west distant coasts lined the dim horizon, on some rose blue mountains of smooth, undulating forms; on a more distant coast arose a prodigious cone crowned on its summit with a snowy plume of white cloud.
To the northward lay spread a vast sheet of water, sparkling and dancing under the hot, bright rays, the uniformity broken here and there by the topmast of a gallant ship appearing above the horizon, or a swelling sail moving slowly before the wind.
This unforeseen spectacle was most charming to eyes long used to underground darkness.
"Where are we?
Where are we?"
I asked faintly.
Hans closed his eyes with lazy indifference.
What did it matter to him?
My uncle looked round with dumb surprise.
"Well, whatever mountain this may be," he said at last, "it is very hot here. The explosions are going on still, and I don't think it would look well to have come out by an eruption, and then to get our heads broken by bits of falling rock.
Let us get down.
Then we shall know better what we are about.
Besides, I am starving, and parching with thirst."
Decidedly the Professor was not given to contemplation.
For my part, I could for another hour or two have forgotten my hunger and my fatigue to enjoy the lovely scene before me; but I had to follow my companions.
The slope of the volcano was in many places of great steepness. We slid down screes of ashes, carefully avoiding the lava streams which glided sluggishly by us like fiery serpents.
As we went I chattered and asked all sorts of questions as to our whereabouts, for I was too much excited not to talk a great deal.
"We are in Asia," I cried, "on the coasts of India, in the Malay Islands, or in Oceania.
We have passed through half the globe, and come out nearly at the antipodes."
"But the compass?"
said my uncle.
"Ay, the compass!"
I said, greatly puzzled.
"According to the compass we have gone northward."
"Has it lied?"
"Surely not.
Could it lie?"
"Unless, indeed, this is the North Pole!"
"Oh, no, it is not the Pole; but - "
Well, here was something that baffled us completely.
I could not tell what to say.
But now we were coming into that delightful greenery, and I was suffering greatly from hunger and thirst.
Happily, after two hours' walking, a charming country lay open before us, covered with olive trees, pomegranate trees, and delicious vines, all of which seemed to belong to anybody who pleased to claim them.
Besides, in our state of destitution and famine we were not likely to be particular.
Oh, the inexpressible pleasure of pressing those cool, sweet fruits to our lips, and eating grapes by mouthfuls off the rich, full bunches!
Not far off, in the grass, under the delicious shade of the trees, I discovered a spring of fresh, cool water, in which we luxuriously bathed our faces, hands, and feet.
Whilst we were thus enjoying the sweets of repose a child appeared out of a grove of olive trees.
"Ah!"
I cried, "here is an inhabitant of this happy land!"
It was but a poor boy, miserably ill-clad, a sufferer from poverty, and our aspect seemed to alarm him a great deal; in fact, only half clothed, with ragged hair and beards, we were a suspicious-looking party; and if the people of the country knew anything about thieves, we were very likely to frighten them.
Just as the poor little wretch was going to take to his heels, Hans caught hold of him, and brought him to us, kicking and struggling.
My uncle began to encourage him as well as he could, and said to him in good German:
"Was heiszt diesen Berg, mein Knablein?
Sage mir geschwind!"
("What is this mountain called, my little friend?")
The child made no answer.
"Very well," said my uncle.
"I infer that we are not in Germany."
He put the same question in English.
We got no forwarder.
I was a good deal puzzled.
"Is the child dumb?"
cried the Professor, who, proud of his knowledge of many languages, now tried French: "Comment appellet-on cette montagne, mon enfant?"
Silence still.
"Now let us try Italian," said my uncle; and he said:
"Dove noi siamo?"
"Yes, where are we?"
I impatiently repeated.
But there was no answer still.
"Will you speak when you are told?"
exclaimed my uncle, shaking the urchin by the ears.
"Come si noma questa isola?"
"STROMBOLI," replied the little herdboy, slipping out of Hans' hands, and scudding into the plain across the olive trees.
We were hardly thinking of that. Stromboli! What an effect this unexpected name produced upon my mind!
We were in the midst of the Mediterranean Sea, on an island of the AEolian archipelago, in the ancient Strongyle, where AEolus kept the winds and the storms chained up, to be let loose at his will.
And those distant blue mountains in the east were the mountains of Calabria.
And that threatening volcano far away in the south was the fierce Etna.
"Stromboli, Stromboli!"
I repeated.
My uncle kept time to my exclamations with hands and feet, as well as with words.
We seemed to be chanting in chorus!
What a journey we had accomplished! How marvellous! Having entered by one volcano, we had issued out of another more than two thousand miles from Snaefell and from that barren, far-away Iceland!
The strange chances of our expedition had carried us into the heart of the fairest region in the world.
We had exchanged the bleak regions of perpetual snow and of impenetrable barriers of ice for those of brightness and 'the rich hues of all glorious things.'
We had left over our heads the murky sky and cold fogs of the frigid zone to revel under the azure sky of Italy!
After our delicious repast of fruits and cold, clear water we set off again to reach the port of Stromboli. It would not have been wise to tell how we came there.
The superstitious Italians would have set us down for fire-devils vomited out of hell; so we presented ourselves in the humble guise of shipwrecked mariners.
It was not so glorious, but it was safer.
On my way I could hear my uncle murmuring: "But the compass!
that compass!
It pointed due north.
How are we to explain that fact?"
"My opinion is," I replied disdainfully, "that it is best not to explain it.
That is the easiest way to shelve the difficulty."
"Indeed, sir!
The occupant of a professorial chair at the Johannaeum unable to explain the reason of a cosmical phenomenon!
Why, it would be simply disgraceful!"
And as he spoke, my uncle, half undressed, in rags, a perfect scarecrow, with his leathern belt around him, settling his spectacles upon his nose and looking learned and imposing, was himself again, the terrible German professor of mineralogy.
One hour after we had left the grove of olives, we arrived at the little port of San Vicenzo, where Hans claimed his thirteen week's wages, which was counted out to him with a hearty shaking of hands all round.
At that moment, if he did not share our natural emotion, at least his countenance expanded in a manner very unusual with him, and while with the ends of his fingers he lightly pressed our hands, I believe he smiled.
Such is the conclusion of a history which I cannot expect everybody to believe, for some people will believe nothing against the testimony of their own experience.
However, I am indifferent to their incredulity, and they may believe as much or as little as they please.
The Stromboliotes received us kindly as shipwrecked mariners.
They gave us food and clothing.
After waiting forty-eight hours, on the 31 st of August, a small craft took us to Messina, where a few days' rest completely removed the effect of our fatigues.
On Friday, September the 4th, we embarked on the steamer Volturno, employed by the French Messageries Imperiales, and in three days more we were at Marseilles, having no care on our minds except that abominable deceitful compass, which we had mislaid somewhere and could not now examine; but its inexplicable behaviour exercised my mind fearfully.
On the 9th of September, in the evening, we arrived at Hamburg.
I cannot describe to you the astonishment of Martha or the joy of Graeuben.
"Now you are a hero, Axel," said to me my blushing fiancee, my betrothed, "you will not leave me again!"
I looked tenderly upon her, and she smiled through her tears.
How can I describe the extraordinary sensation produced by the return of Professor Liedenbrock? Thanks to Martha's ineradicable tattling, the news that the Professor had gone to discover a way to the centre of the earth had spread over the whole civilised world.
People refused to believe it, and when they saw him they would not believe him any the more.
Still, the appearance of Hans, and sundry pieces of intelligence derived from Iceland, tended to shake the confidence of the unbelievers.
Then my uncle became a great man, and I was now the nephew of a great man - which is not a privilege to be despised.
Hamburg gave a grand fete in our honour. A public audience was given to the Professor at the Johannaeum, at which he told all about our expedition, with only one omission, the unexplained and inexplicable behaviour of our compass.
On the same day, with much state, he deposited in the archives of the city the now famous document of Saknussemm, and expressed his regret that circumstances over which he had no control had prevented him from following to the very centre of the earth the track of the learned Icelander.
He was modest notwithstanding his glory, and he was all the more famous for his humility.
So much honour could not but excite envy.
There were those who envied him his fame; and as his theories, resting upon known facts, were in opposition to the systems of science upon the question of the central fire, he sustained with his pen and by his voice remarkable discussions with the learned of every country.
For my part I cannot agree with his theory of gradual cooling: in spite of what I have seen and felt, I believe, and always shall believe, in the central heat.
But I admit that certain circumstances not yet sufficiently understood may tend to modify in places the action of natural phenomena.
While these questions were being debated with great animation, my uncle met with a real sorrow.
Our faithful Hans, in spite of our entreaties, had left Hamburg; the man to whom we owed all our success and our lives too would not suffer us to reward him as we could have wished.
He was seized with the mal de pays, a complaint for which we have not even a name in English.
"Farval," said he one day; and with that simple word he left us and sailed for Rejkiavik, which he reached in safety.
We were strongly attached to our brave eider-down hunter; though far away in the remotest north, he will never be forgotten by those whose lives he protected, and certainly I shall not fail to endeavour to see him once more before I die.
To conclude, I have to add that this 'Journey into the Interior of the Earth' created a wonderful sensation in the world. It was translated into all civilised languages.
The leading newspapers extracted the most interesting passages, which were commented upon, picked to pieces, discussed, attacked, and defended with equal enthusiasm and determination, both by believers and sceptics.
Rare privilege!
my uncle enjoyed during his lifetime the glory he had deservedly won; and he may even boast the distinguished honour of an offer from Mr. Barnum, to exhibit him on most advantageous terms in all the principal cities in the United States!
But there was one 'dead fly' amidst all this glory and honour; one fact, one incident, of the journey remained a mystery.
Now to a man eminent for his learning, an unexplained phenomenon is an unbearable hardship.
Well!
it was yet reserved for my uncle to be completely happy.
One day, while arranging a collection of minerals in his cabinet, I noticed in a corner this unhappy compass, which we had long lost sight of; I opened it, and began to watch it.
It had been in that corner for six months, little mindful of the trouble it was giving.
Suddenly, to my intense astonishment, I noticed a strange fact, and I uttered a cry of surprise.
"What is the matter?"
my uncle asked.
"That compass!"
"Well?"
"See, its poles are reversed!"
"Reversed?"
"Yes, they point the wrong way."
My uncle looked, he compared, and the house shook with his triumphant leap of exultation.
A light broke in upon his spirit and mine.
"See there," he cried, as soon as he was able to speak.
"After our arrival at Cape Saknussemm the north pole of the needle of this confounded compass began to point south instead of north."
"Evidently!"
"Here, then, is the explanation of our mistake.
But what phenomenon could have caused this reversal of the poles?"
"The reason is evident, uncle."
"Tell me, then, Axel."
"During the electric storm on the Liedenbrock sea, that ball of fire, which magnetised all the iron on board, reversed the poles of our magnet!"
"Aha!
aha!"
shouted the Professor with a loud laugh.
"So it was just an electric joke!"
From that day forth the Professor was the most glorious of savants, and I was the happiest of men; for my pretty Virlandaise, resigning her place as ward, took her position in the old house on the Koenigstrasse in the double capacity of niece to my uncle and wife to a certain happy youth.
What is the need of adding that the illustrious Otto Liedenbrock, corresponding member of all the scientific, geographical, and mineralogical societies of all the civilised world, was now her uncle and mine?