Millions of lucky people in Africa and Asia had the opportunity to witness an unusual celestial event on January 15, 2010.
Using special dark glasses, pinhole cameras, and other devices so that they would not be blinded by the Sun, they saw a rare annular solar eclipse.
This kind of eclipse takes place when the Sun is closest to Earth and the Moon is farthest away, so the Moon does not completely cover the Sun.
This means that at the peak phase of the eclipse the rim of the Sun is visible all around the disk of the Moon.
The peak phase of the January 15 eclipse lasted 11 minutes and 8 seconds.
Such a duration for an annular solar eclipse will not be exceeded until the year 3043.
The subject of eclipses is just one of the many fascinating topics you will learn more about in this volume.
Early Egyptians and Chinese used their eyes to study the annual patterns of the sky carefully enough to make accurate calendars.
During the 2nd century AD, the Egyptian astronomer Ptolemy formulated his geocentric (Earth-centered) model of the universe now known as the Ptolemaic system.
It was not until the 1500s that the Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus determined that Ptolemy’s notion that the Sun revolves around Earth was invalid - instead, he concluded that Earth and the other planets actually orbit around the Sun.
<Caption> Observers watch the January 15, 2010, annular solar eclipse at the central stadium in Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, South India.
EyesWideOpen/Getty Images
But there was no way to prove Copernicus’ idea until the invention of the telescope.
This revolutionary new piece of technology allowed Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei in the early 1600s to carefully record the movement of different heavenly bodies, including four moons which he observed revolving around Jupiter.
Galileo’s findings paved the way for the confirmation of Copernicus’ theory.
Over time, telescopes have been getting larger and more powerful.
Now there are even telescopes in space.
NASA’s Kepler space telescope recently revealed a rocky planet, named Kepler-10b, that astronomers believe to be the smallest planet ever discovered outside our solar system.
In the 20th century, scientists deepened their understanding not only of astronomy but also cosmology, the study of the universe and its laws.
Along with technology, scientists use mathematics and physics to make discoveries.
Albert Einstein revolutionized cosmology in 1905 with his special theory of relativity, which stated that space and time could be seen as parts of a deeper structure, space-time, and that mass and energy are really the same thing.
Scientists later developed the big bang theory.
According to this theory, the universe started some 13 billion years ago with a sudden expansion of matter and antimatter.
Many scientific tests have confirmed the validity of this theory.
In this book, you will learn about important advances that astronomers have made through time.
But you will also learn that astronomy is one of the few sciences in which amateurs can play a significant role.
You do not need your own Kepler telescope or a Ph.D. in physics to make a significant contribution.
With the proper tools - including knowledge and a sharp eye - even an amateur can make an important discovery.
In 1995 two amateur astronomers, Alan Hale and Thomas Bopp, working independently of each other, spotted a comet beyond the orbit of Jupiter.
Comet Hale-Bopp, as it came to be known, reached perihelion (the closest distance to the Sun) on April 1, 1997, without ever coming very close to Earth.
It was, however, spectacularly visible to the naked eye and became perhaps the most widely witnessed comet of the 20th century.
Since the beginnings of humankind people have gazed at the heavens.
Before the dawn of history someone noticed that certain celestial bodies moved in orderly and predictable paths, and astronomy - an ancient science - was born.
Yet some of science’s newest discoveries have been made in this same field, which includes the study of all matter outside Earth’s atmosphere.
From simple observations of the motions of the Sun and the stars as they pass across the sky, to advanced theories of the exotic states of matter in collapsed stars, astronomy has spanned the ages.
For centuries astronomers concentrated on learning about the motions of heavenly bodies.
They saw the Sun rise in the east and set in the west.
In the night sky they saw tiny points of light.
Most of these lights - the stars - seemed to stay in the same place in relation to one another, as if they were all fastened to a huge black globe surrounding Earth.
Other lights, however, seemed to travel, going from group to group of stationary stars.
They named these moving points planets, which means “wanderers” in Greek.
<Caption> New stars are forming from the hot gas and dust of the Orion nebula, a major “stellar nursery” only some 1,500 light-years from Earth.
Our sun probably formed in a similar environment.
More than 500 separate images were combined to create this mosaic.
NASA, ESA, M. Robberto (Space Telescope Science Institute/ESA) and the Hubble Space Telescope Orion Treasury Project Team
Ancient astronomers thought that the positions of celestial bodies revealed what was going to happen on Earth - wars, births, deaths, and good fortune or bad.
This system of belief is called astrology.
Most scientists no longer believe in astrology, but they have found that some ancient astrologers were good at observing the motions and positions of stars and planets.
When people today look at the sky without a telescope or other modern instrument, they see basically the same things the ancient astronomers saw.
During a clear day one can see the Sun and sometimes a faint Moon.
On a clear night one can see stars and usually the Moon.
Sometimes a star may seem to be in different positions from night to night: it is really a planet, one of the “wanderers” of the ancients.
The planets all circle the Sun, just as Earth does.
They are visible from Earth because sunlight bounces off them.
The stars are much farther away.
Most stars are like the Sun - large, hot, and bright.
They shine from their own energy.
A broad strip of dim light is also visible across the night sky.
It is a clustering of faint stars known as the Milky Way.
The Milky Way is part of the Milky Way galaxy - an enormous cluster of stars, of which the Sun is only one member out of more than 100 billion stars.
Other galaxies exist far beyond the Milky Way.
The apparent westward motion of the Sun, the Moon, and the stars is not real.
They seem to move around Earth, but this apparent motion is actually caused by Earth’s movement.
Earth rotates eastward, completing one rotation each day.
This may be hard to believe at first, because when one thinks of motion one usually also thinks of the vibrations of moving cars or trains.
But Earth moves freely in space, without rubbing against anything, so it does not vibrate.
It is this gentle rotation, uninhibited by significant friction, that makes the Sun, the Moon, and the stars appear to be rising and setting.
<Caption> Planet Earth rises above the moon’s horizon in an unprecedented view captured in December 1968 by Apollo 8 astronauts as their orbit carried them clear of the far side of the moon.
NASA
<Caption> As the moon revolves in an almost circular path around Earth, Earth moves in a similar path around the sun.
Both motions combine to give the moon a wavy orbit.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Earth is accompanied by the Moon, which moves around the planet at a distance of about 30 Earth diameters.
At the same time, Earth moves around the Sun.
Every year Earth completes one revolution around the Sun.
This motion, along with the tilt of Earth’s rotation axis (relative to the axis of its revolution around the Sun), accounts for the changes in the seasons.
When the northern half of Earth is tipped toward the Sun, the Northern Hemisphere experiences summer and the Southern Hemisphere, which is tipped away from the Sun, experiences winter.
When Earth has moved to the other side of the Sun, six months later, the seasons are reversed because the Southern Hemisphere is then tipped toward the Sun and the Northern Hemisphere is tipped away from the Sun.
The Moon does not always look the same from Earth.
Sometimes it looks round, sometimes like a thin, curved sliver.
These apparent changes are called the phases of the Moon.
They occur because the Moon shines only when the Sun’s light bounces off its surface.
This means that only the side of the Moon that faces the Sun is bright.
When the Moon is between Earth and the Sun, the light side of the Moon faces away from Earth.
This is called the new moon, and it is not visible from Earth.
When the Moon is on the other side of Earth from the Sun, its entire light side faces Earth.
This is called the full moon.
Halfway between the new and full moons, in locations on either side of Earth, are the first quarter and the last quarter (which look like half disks as viewed from Earth).
In ancient times people often were terrified when the Sun or the Moon seemed to disappear completely when normally it would be visible.
They did not understand what caused these eclipses.
Eventually, astronomers reasoned that lunar eclipses (when a previously full moon at least partly disappears from the night sky) are the result of Earth passing between the Moon and the Sun.
Earth thus casts a shadow on the Moon.
Similarly, solar eclipses (when the Sun partly or totally disappears from the daytime sky) occur when the Moon passes between Earth and the Sun.
The Moon thus blocks the Sun’s light temporarily.
Eclipses occur irregularly because the plane of the Moon’s orbit around Earth is slightly different from the plane of Earth’s orbit around the Sun.
The two planes intersect at an angle of about 5 degrees.
This means that the Moon is usually slightly above or below the line between Earth and the Sun, so neither Earth nor the Moon throws a shadow on the other.
Eclipses can occur only when the Moon lies at one of the two points where the planes intersect.
If this were not so, there would be lunar eclipses with every full moon and solar eclipses with every new moon.
When the Moon does pass directly into Earth’s shadow, a circular darkening gradually advances across the Moon’s face, totally covering it within about an hour.
Usually the Moon remains dimly visible as sunlight passes through and is refracted (bent) by Earth’s atmosphere, thus reaching the otherwise darkened lunar surface.
After another hour or two, the Moon has left the shadow and again appears full.
Interestingly, during the partial phases of a lunar eclipse, Earth’s shadow is easily seen to be circular.
This indicated to at least some early astronomers that Earth is approximately spherical.
<Caption> In the successive phases of a solar eclipse, the dark disk of the moon gradually moves across the disk of the sun from west (right) to east (left).
Copyright Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.; rendering for this edition by Rosen Educational Services
When the Moon’s shadow falls on Earth, a much more dramatic spectacle occurs.
The shadow consists of two parts - the umbra and the penumbra.
In the penumbra, the Moon blocks only part of the Sun, and on Earth many people may not notice anything unusual.
The umbra, however, is the cone-shaped region in which the Sun’s light is totally blocked.
When the tip of this shadow reaches Earth, the Moon’s disk appears big enough in Earth’s sky to cover the Sun.
This patch of darkness is rarely more than 150 miles (240 kilometers) wide.
It races across Earth at over 1,000 miles (1,600 kilometers) per hour as the Moon moves.
Those in its path see the Sun completely disappear from the sky and are enveloped in darkness almost as deep as night for up to about 7 minutes.
During totality the Sun’s corona, or outer atmosphere, can be seen surrounding the black silhouette of the Moon’s disk.
The corona is only about as bright as a full moon and is normally blotted out by the bright daytime sky.
An eclipse provides a rare opportunity to see the corona.
Sometimes the umbra fails to reach Earth’s surface, meaning that the Moon is too far from Earth to appear big enough to totally cover the Sun.
This leaves a thin but bright ring of sunlight at mid-eclipse.
Such eclipses are called annular.
They occur a bit more frequently than total eclipses do.
Only the total phase of a solar eclipse is safe to view, as looking at even a small part of the Sun can cause permanent eye damage.
Various filters and other methods exist to allow safe viewing of partial phases, but even these should be used with care.
Sometimes one can see a flash of light streak across the night sky and disappear.
Although this is commonly called a shooting star, real stars do not shoot through the sky any more than the Sun does.
Many small chunks of stone, metal, or other materials orbit the Sun.
Sometimes they enter Earth’s atmosphere, and the friction generated by their great speed causes them to burn up.
The fragments may either vaporize before traveling far or actually hit the ground.
Astronomers are at a distinct disadvantage compared with practitioners of other sciences; with few exceptions, they cannot experiment on the objects they study.
Virtually all the information available is in the form of electromagnetic radiation (such as light) arriving from distant objects.
Fortunately, this radiation contains an amazing number of clues to the nature of the objects emitting it.
<Caption> Radio waves, infrared rays, visible light, ultraviolet rays, X-rays, and gamma rays are all types of electromagnetic radiation.
Radio waves have the longest wavelength, and gamma rays have the shortest wavelength.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Electromagnetic radiation travels in the form of waves, or oscillating electric and magnetic fields.
In its interaction with matter, however, it is best understood as consisting of particles, called photons.
These waves occur in a vast variety of frequencies and wavelengths.
In order of increasing frequency (decreasing wavelength) these parts of the electromagnetic spectrum are called radio waves, microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays.
As particles, radio wave photons carry the least amount of energy and gamma rays the most.
Naturally, the first part of the spectrum to be studied with instruments was visible light.
Telescopes, first used for astronomy by Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei in 1609, use lenses or mirrors to form images of distant objects.
These images can be viewed directly or captured using film or electronic devices.
Telescopes gather more light than the naked eye and magnify the image, allowing finer details to be seen.
Even though early telescopes were crude by today’s standards, they almost immediately allowed discoveries such as the Moon’s craters, Jupiter’s moons, Saturn’s rings, Venus’ phases, sunspots, and thousands of previously unseen stars.
In the 20th century new technologies allowed the development of telescopes capable of detecting electromagnetic radiation all the way across the spectrum.
Many objects emit most of their “light” at frequencies well outside the visible range.
Even objects that do emit visible light often betray much more information when studied at other wavelengths.
By the 1990s optical (visible light) telescopes reached enormous size and power, a good example being the Keck telescopes on top of Mauna Kea in Hawaii.
These two telescopes have collecting mirrors 33 feet (10 meters) in diameter, allowing detection of objects millions of times fainter than can be seen with the naked eye, with detail about a thousand times finer.
Actually, astronomers seldom look through such telescopes directly.
Instead, they use cameras to capture images photographically or newer, more sensitive detectors to capture images electronically.
Most work is now done with electronic detectors, including charge-coupled devices (CCDs).
<Caption> The Hubble Space Telescope appears in a photograph taken from the space shuttle Discovery on December 21, 1999.
NASA
Since the 1940s radio telescopes have made great contributions.
The largest single antenna, with a dish diameter of 1,000 feet (300 meters), is the Arecibo instrument in Puerto Rico.
Huge arrays of multiple telescopes, such as the Very Large Array (VLA) in New Mexico, allow highly detailed imaging using radio waves, which otherwise yield rather “blurry” images.
The largest is the Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA), consisting of 10 dishes scattered over an area thousands of miles across the United States.
Data from these instruments are correlated using a technique called interferometry.
The level of detail that can then be seen in radio-emitting objects (such as the centers of distant galaxies) is equivalent to discerning a dime at a distance of a few thousand miles.
A tremendous advance has been the placement of astronomical instruments in space.
Telescopes and other instruments aboard unmanned spacecraft have explored all the Sun’s planets at close range.
At least as important, though, have been large telescopes placed in Earth orbit, above the obscuring and blurring effects of Earth’s atmosphere.
The best known of these telescopes is NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope, which was launched in 1990 into an orbit 380 miles (610 kilometers) above Earth’s surface.
It initially returned disappointing images, owing to a mistake in the grinding of its 94.5-inch (2.4-meter) primary mirror.
In 1993 space shuttle astronauts installed corrective optics, and ever since it has returned magnificent data.
While Hubble is smaller than many groundbased telescopes, the lack of air to distort the images has generally allowed it better views than can be had from the ground, leading to many discoveries.
Interestingly, a technology called adaptive optics now allows many ground-based telescopes to rival Hubble’s level of detail, by removing much of the blurring effect of the atmosphere.
<Caption> Images of the Crab nebula captured at different wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation reveal different features.
The nebula is the remains of a star that Chinese astronomers saw explode in AD 1054.
At its center is a pulsar, or the star’s very dense collapsed core that spins rapidly while beaming out radiation.
The Crab nebula is still undergoing violent expansion.
This X-ray image from the Chandra X-Ray Observatory reveals high-energy particles that the pulsar seems to have blasted outward, in rings from the center and in jets perpendicular to the rings.
Over time, the particles move farther outward and lose energy to radiation.
The cloud of lower-energy gas and dust surrounding the pulsar can be seen in images taken at longer wavelengths. (
The images are not to scale.
The area of the nebula shown in visible light is actually 60 percent larger than the area shown in X-rays.
The area shown in radio waves is about 20 percent larger than that in visible light.)
NASA/MSFC
Less well known than Hubble but perhaps just as important are several other space telescopes that specialize in other parts of the spectrum.
NASA’s Compton Gamma Ray Observatory (whose mission lasted from 1991 to 2000) and Chandra X-ray Observatory (launched in 1999) have sent back a flood of data about objects such as neutron stars and black holes.
These objects produce high-energy radiation that is largely blocked by Earth’s atmosphere.
NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (launched in 2003) detects a wide range of infrared radiation, which is emitted by cooler objects, including interstellar clouds of gas and dust, where stars and planets form.
<Caption> The Crab nebula appears in an infrared image.
2MASS/UMass/IPACCaltech/NASA/NSF
<Caption> The Crab nebula appears in a radio image.
VLA/NRAO
Stars give off a whole range of electromagnetic radiation.
The kind of radiation is related to the temperature of the star: the higher the temperature of the star, the more energy it gives off and the more this energy is concentrated in high-frequency radiation.
An instrument called a spectrograph can separate radiation into the different frequencies.
The array of frequencies makes up the spectrum of the star.
The color of a star is also an indication of its temperature.
Red light has less energy than blue light.
A reddish star must have a large amount of its energy in red light.
A white or bluish star has a larger amount of higher-energy blue light, so it must be hotter than the reddish star.
Stars have bright or dark lines in their spectra.
These bright or dark lines are narrow regions of extra-high emission or absorption of electromagnetic radiation.
The presence of a certain chemical, such as hydrogen or calcium, in the star causes a particular set of lines in the star’s spectrum.
Since most of the lines found in stellar spectra have been identified with specific chemicals, astronomers can learn from a star’s spectrum what chemicals it contains.
The solar system consists of the Sun plus all the objects that orbit it.
With more than 99 percent of the solar system’s total mass and a diameter more than 100 times that of Earth and 10 times that of Jupiter, the Sun is quite naturally the center of the system.
The spectrum, brightness, mass, size, and age of the Sun and of nearby stars indicate that the Sun is a typical star.
Like most stars, the Sun produces energy by thermonuclear processes that take place at its core.
This energy maintains the conditions needed for life on Earth.
<Caption> At the center of the solar system is the Sun, which produces an enormous amount of energy.
This image was taken in extreme ultraviolet light by the Earth-orbiting Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite.
Nearly white areas are the hottest, while deep-red regions are the coolest.
A massive prominence can be seen erupting at lower left.
NASA
As has been mentioned above, Earth is not the only body to circle the Sun.
Many chunks of matter, some much larger than Earth and some microscopic, are caught in the Sun’s gravitational field.
Eight of the largest of these chunks are called planets.
Earth is the third planet from the Sun.
The smaller chunks of matter include dwarf planets, natural satellites (moons), asteroids, comets, meteoroids, and the molecules of interplanetary gases.
In the early 1600s astronomers were beginning to accept the idea that Earth and the planets revolve around the Sun, rather than that the Sun and the planets revolve around Earth.
Astronomers were still unable, however, to describe the motions of the planets as accurately as they could measure them.
The German astronomer Johannes Kepler was finally able to describe planetary motions using three mathematical expressions, which came to be known as Kepler’s laws of planetary motion.
In carefully studying Mars, Kepler found that its orbit is not circular, as had been assumed.
Rather, the orbits of the planets are elliptical, with the Sun at one of two fixed points in the ellipse called foci.
Also, as a planet travels around the Sun, its speed is greater when it is closer to the Sun.
An imaginary line drawn from the moving planet to the Sun would sweep out equal areas in equal time intervals.
Finally, Kepler found a mathematical relationship between a planet’s average distance from the Sun and its orbital period (the time it takes to complete an orbit).
Specifically, he found that the squares of the planets’ orbital periods are proportional to the cubes of their average distances from the Sun.
<Caption> Kepler’s second law of planetary motion describes the speed of a planet traveling in an elliptical orbit around the Sun.
It states that a line between the sun and the planet sweeps equal areas in equal times.
Thus, the speed of the planet increases as it nears the Sun and decreases as it recedes from the Sun.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
To find these laws, Kepler had to effectively make a scale drawing of the solar system.
He did this using extremely accurate observations collected by his former employer, the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe.
Kepler used a relative distance scale in which the average distance from Earth to the Sun was called one astronomical unit.
Kepler did not have a particularly accurate value for the astronomical unit.
To help find this distance, later astronomers were able to use methods such as parallax.
In astronomy, a parallax is the difference in direction of a celestial object as seen by an observer from two widely separated points.
The two positions of the observer and the position of the object form a triangle; if the base line between the two observing points is known and the direction of the object as seen from each has been measured, the apex angle (the parallax) and the distance of the object from the observer can be found simply.
Even more advanced methods have determined that Earth’s average distance from the Sun is in fact 92,955,808 miles (149,597,870 kilometers).
Kepler’s laws described the positions and motions of the planets with great accuracy, but they did not explain what caused the planets to follow those paths.
If the planets were not acted on by some force, scientists reasoned, they would simply continue to move in a straight line past the Sun and out toward the stars.
Some force must be attracting them to the Sun.
The English scientist Isaac Newton calculated that in order for Kepler’s laws to have the form they do, this force must grow weaker with increasing distance from the Sun, in a particular way called an inverse square law.
He also realized that the Moon’s curved path around Earth was a type of weak acceleration toward Earth.
He calculated this acceleration to be much less than that of an apple falling from a tree.
In comparing these accelerations, he found their difference to be described by the same inverse square law that described the force the Sun exerted on the planets.
Even the orbits of the other planets’ moons could be similarly explained.
Newton concluded that all masses in the universe attract each other with this universal force, which he called gravitation.
Up to the 18th century people knew of seven bodies, besides Earth, that moved against the background of the fixed stars.
These were the Sun, the Moon, and the five planets that are easily visible to the unaided eye: Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
Then, in 1781, William Herschel, a German-born English organist and amateur astronomer, discovered a new planet, which became known as Uranus.
<Caption> A montage shows the eight planets of the solar system plus Pluto, with the images placed right next to each other and scaled to show their approximate sizes relative to one another. (
The distances between them are not to scale.)
The yellow segment at left represents the Sun, to scale.
The planets, from left to right, are Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
Pluto, at right, was classified as a planet from the time of its discovery in 1930 until 2006, when the International Astronomical Union made it the prototype of a new category of celestial objects, dwarf planets.
NASA/Lunar and Planetary Laboratory
Uranus’ motion did not follow the exact path predicted by Newton’s theory of gravitation.
This problem was happily resolved by the discovery of an eighth planet, which was named Neptune.
Two mathematicians, John Couch Adams and Urbain-Jean-Joseph Le Verrier, had calculated Neptune’s probable location, but it was the German astronomer Johann Gottfried Galle who located the planet, in 1846.
Even then some small deviations seemed to remain in the orbits of both planets.
This led to the search for yet another planet, based on calculations made by the U.S. astronomer Percival Lowell.
In 1930 the U.S. astronomer Clyde W. Tombaugh discovered the object that became known as Pluto.
Pluto is an icy body that is smaller than Earth’s Moon.
The mass of Pluto has proved so small - about of Earth’s mass - that it could not have been responsible for the deviations in the observed paths of Uranus and Neptune.
The orbital deviations, however, had been predicted on the basis of the best estimates of the planets’ mass available at that time.
When astronomers recalculated using more accurate measurements taken by NASA’s Voyager 2 spacecraft in 1989, the deviations “disappeared.”
Cosmology is the scientific inquiry into the nature, history, development, and fate of the universe.
By making assumptions that are not contradicted by the behavior of the observable universe, scientists build models, or theories, that attempt to describe the universe as a whole, including its origin and its future.
They use each model until something is found that contradicts it.
Then the model must be modified or discarded.
In 1905 Albert Einstein published his theory of special relativity, which showed that space and time can be seen as aspects of a deeper structure, space-time, and that mass and energy are really the same thing.
In 1916 he followed this with his theory of general relativity, in which gravity is understood as a warping, or bending, of space-time by the presence of mass.
This new theory of gravity, which has passed a number of experimental tests, paved the way for the modern scientific study of cosmology.
Einstein soon realized that his basic equations, in their simplest form, required that the universe be either expanding or contracting.
Its matter - along with space itself - would be either flying apart or falling together.
Einstein, like most astronomers at the time and much like Newton two centuries before, objected to such a conclusion.
He favored instead the idea of a static universe, one essentially unchanging through infinite time.
He realized that his equations could include a special term, called the “cosmological constant”, which could supply a sort of repulsive force, capable of balancing gravity and keeping the universe static.
While it might be simpler to leave it out (by assigning it a value of zero), Einstein assigned it a positive value so that the universe would be essentially unchanging, as he expected.
In 1929, however, U.S. astronomer Edwin Hubble announced an amazing discovery - evidence that the universe actually is expanding.
In the mid-1920s astronomers had found that a class of cloudlike objects, then called spiral nebulae, are actually huge, distant groups of billions of stars, now called galaxies.
Hubble’s analysis of their light showed that, with the exception of a few of the closest ones, they are all moving away from Earth, many at tremendous speeds.
When Einstein realized that he had held in his hands the monumental prediction of a universe evolving through time and had then undone it with the cosmological constant, he called it the “greatest blunder” of his life.
To determine the distances to other galaxies, Hubble compared the brightness of certain giant stars in these galaxies to the brightness of presumably similar stars in our own galaxy, whose distances had been calculated by a number of other, overlapping methods.
To determine the speed at which a galaxy was receding from Earth, he observed its spectrum.
Dark lines in the spectrum of colors can be identified as being produced by specific elements known on Earth.
For these galaxies, the lines were shifted away from their normal wavelengths toward the red, long-wavelength part of the spectrum.
This effect is known as redshift.
It is similar to the Doppler effect for sound, in which, for instance, a train whistle’s pitch seems to drop as the train passes by.
The sound waves from the receding train whistle are stretched out behind the train and arrive at the listener with a longer wavelength and thus a lower pitch.
The wavelengths of light from a receding object are likewise stretched longer, making the light appear redder than it would otherwise. (
If a galaxy were moving closer, it would appear to be blue instead of red).
Hubble plotted recessional speeds of galaxies versus their distance from Earth and found that the more distant ones were moving away at proportionally greater speeds, so that the graph formed nearly a straight line.
This relation is known as Hubble’s law.
It can be written v = H × d, where v is the velocity of recession, d is the distance to the galaxy, and H is the slope of the line and is called the Hubble constant.
According to this, for example, a galaxy twice as far away from an observer as another galaxy is moving away from the observer twice as fast.
It is important to realize that this expansion is not best thought of as galaxies rushing away from each other through preexisting space, but rather as an expansion of space itself, which “carries” the galaxies with it.
With this in mind, the redshift can be considered as the effect of space having stretched since the light was emitted.
Light emitted when the universe was half its current size, for example, would now be seen to have twice the original wavelength.
<Caption> This composite photo reveals the deepest view of the visible universe ever seen.
Created by the space-bound Hubble Telescope, it reveals galaxies from the time shortly after the big bang.
NASA/Getty Images
The distribution of the galaxies Hubble studied also provided evidence of the cosmological principle - two important properties that the universe is assumed to have.
At large scales the universe is isotropic, or looks about the same in all directions, and homogeneous, or is about the same everywhere.
If the positions of vast numbers of galaxies were plotted to form a map of the observable universe, their large-scale distribution would look roughly the same from all angles and in all regions.
This means that, even though we see other galaxies rushing away from us, we cannot claim to be located in the “center”; an observer anywhere in the universe would see about the same thing.
Every cluster of galaxies, including ours, is receding from all others as space expands.
Hubble’s findings about the expansion of the universe have a very interesting implication.
If the motion of the galaxies is traced back in time, it implies that they were once all in the same place - “here.”
The universe would have then been greatly compressed and therefore very dense and hot.
This scenario - of a universe that “exploded” out of an extremely tiny, dense, and hot initial state - became known as the big bang theory.
In the 1920s Georges Lemaître and Aleksandr Friedmann proposed early versions of such a model, which George Gamow and other cosmologists modified in the 1940s.
Tracing the expansion of the universe back toward its presumed origin can be thought of as like playing a movie backward.
As one “rewinds,” one finds the universe’s average temperature increasing, much like that of a gas being compressed.
At an age of a few hundred thousand years, the temperature would have been thousands of degrees Fahrenheit or Celsius, thus stripping atoms of their electrons.
If one could have witnessed this state, there would have been a brilliant glow coming from all directions.
Calculations show that at about a second after the beginning, temperatures would have been billions of degrees.
Under such conditions the nuclei of atoms would be smashed apart into their constituent neutrons and protons.
At even earlier times, neutrons and protons would be broken up into the quarks of which they are made.
These would be embedded in a soup of radiation - mainly gamma rays - along with electrons and positrons.
<Caption> According to the evolutionary, or big bang, theory of the universe, the universe is expanding while the total energy and matter it contains remain constant.
Therefore, as the universe expands, the density of its energy and matter must become progressively thinner.
At left is a two-dimensional representation of the universe as it appears now, with galaxies occupying a typical section of space.
At right, billions of years later the same amount of matter will fill a larger volume of space.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Two crucial predictions emerge from this scenario.
Playing the movie forward again, one finds that in the rapidly cooling universe, only a fraction of the protons and neutrons would have had time to fuse together to form elements heavier than hydrogen, which has only one proton.
Calculations show that, by the time this fusion ended about a few minutes after the beginning, the cooling gas would have consisted of nearly 75 percent hydrogen, about 25 percent helium, and trace amounts of deuterium and lithium.
One would expect this primordial 3:1 hydrogen-to-helium ratio to dominate the universe even today.
The second prediction involves the light produced by the radiant heat of the early universe.
Before the formation of atoms, the particles of light, called photons, frequently scattered off of electrons, which were not yet incorporated into atoms.
As atoms formed about 400,000 years after the beginning, the light finally had a clear path.
Light that was thus released at a great distance should just now be reaching us.
It would be coming from parts of the universe receding from us at nearly the speed of light, so that it would be greatly redshifted, all the way into the microwave region of the spectrum.
This microwave glow should be coming from all directions in the sky, with almost uniform intensity.
The first of these predictions was quickly supported by spectroscopic studies.
Indeed, the visible matter in the universe does appear to be mostly hydrogen and helium, in about a 3:1 ratio, with only small amounts of heavier elements.
However, the existence of most elements heavier than helium, such as what the Earth - and people - are made of, required an explanation.
This was soon accounted for by studies of fusion reactions that power the stars.
Stars produce heavier elements in their cores, and some of these stars explode or otherwise expel matter, enriching the universe with a fairly small but significant amount of matter heavier than helium.
Interestingly, the term “big bang” was originally intended as a derisive one; it was coined in the 1940s by Fred Hoyle, who championed a competing model known as the steady state theory.
In that model, the universe is expanding, but its general appearance and composition remain constant through time, as new matter is gradually created to fill in the gaps left by matter that has spread out.
The universe would be infinitely old and would last forever.
For a decade or so, mainly in the 1950s, this theory enjoyed significant support.
Until the invention of the telescope and the discovery of the laws of motion and gravity in the 17th century, astronomy was primarily concerned with noting and predicting the positions of the Sun, Moon, and planets.
The catalog of objects studied today is much broader, as the development of modern instruments and the advent of scientific space probes have allowed astronomers to investigate the reaches of space far beyond Earth’s atmosphere.
The ruins of many ancient structures indicate that their builders observed the motions of the Sun, Moon, and other celestial bodies.
The most famous of these is probably England’s Stonehenge, which was built between about 3100 and 1550 BC.
Some of the monument’s large stones were aligned in relationship to the position of the rising Sun on the summer solstice.
Several hundreds of other ancient structures showing astronomical alignment also have been found in Europe, Egypt, and the Americas.
In many early civilizations, astronomy was sufficiently advanced that reliable calendars had been developed.
In ancient Egypt, astronomer-priests were responsible for anticipating the season of the annual flooding of the Nile River.
The Maya, who lived in what is now central Mexico, developed a complicated calendar system about 2,000 years ago.
The Dresden Codex, a Mayan text from the 1st millennium AD, contains exceptionally accurate astronomical calculations, including tables predicting eclipses and the movements of Venus.
<Caption> A copy of part of the Dresden Codex is shown in Guatemala City, Guatemala.
Orlando Sierra/AFP/Getty Images
In China, a calendar had been developed by the 14th century BC.
In about 350 BC a Chinese astronomer, Shih Shen, drew up what may be the earliest star catalog, listing about 800 stars.
Chinese records mention comets, meteors, large sunspots, and novas.
The early Greek astronomers knew many of the geometric relationships of the heavenly bodies.
Some, including Aristotle, thought Earth was a sphere.
Eratosthenes, born in about 276 BC, demonstrated its circumference.
Hipparchus, who lived around 140 BC, was a prolific and talented astronomer.
Among many other accomplishments, he classified stars according to apparent brightness, estimated the size and distance of the Moon, found a way to predict eclipses, and calculated the length of the year to within minutes.
The most influential ancient astronomer historically was Ptolemy (Claudius Ptolemaeus) of Alexandria, who lived in about AD 140.
His geometric scheme predicted the motions of the planets.
In his view, Earth occupied the center of the universe.
His theory approximating the true motions of the celestial bodies was held steadfastly until the end of the Middle Ages.
<Caption> Ptolemy of Alexandria.
SSPL via Getty Images
In medieval times Western astronomy did not progress.
During those centuries Hindu and Arab astronomers kept the science alive.
The records of the Arab astronomers and their translations of Greek astronomical treatises were the foundation of the later upsurge in Western astronomy.
In 1543, the year the astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus died, came the publication of his theory that Earth and the other planets revolved around the Sun.
His suggestion contradicted all the authorities of the time and caused great controversy.
The Italian astronomer Galileo supported Copernicus’ theory with his observations that other celestial bodies, the satellites of Jupiter, clearly did not circle Earth.
<Caption> Nicolaus Copernicus.
Fotosearch/Archive Photos/Getty Images
The astronomer Tycho Brahe rejected Copernicus’ theory.
Yet his data on planetary positions were later used to support that theory.
When Tycho died, his assistant, Johannes Kepler, analyzed Tycho’s data and developed the laws of planetary motion.
In 1687 Newton’s law of gravitation and laws of motion explained Kepler’s laws.
Meanwhile, the instruments available to astronomers were growing more sophisticated.
Beginning with Galileo, the telescope was used to reveal many hitherto invisible phenomena, such as the revolution of satellites about other planets.
The development of the spectroscope in the early 1800s was a major step forward in the development of astronomical instruments.
Later, photography became an invaluable aid to astronomers.
They could study photographs at leisure and make microscopic measurements on them.
Even more recent instrumental developments - including radar, telescopes that detect electromagnetic radiation other than visible light, and space probes and manned spaceflights - have helped answer old questions and have opened astronomers’ eyes to new problems.
Amateur astronomy is a popular pastime around the world.
Astronomy enthusiasts usually subscribe to popular astronomical periodicals and often own moderately priced telescopes.
Almost every large city has some kind of astronomy club, and many countries have national organizations of amateur astronomers interested in promoting their hobby.
As amateurs far outnumber professional astronomers, it is often an amateur astronomer who discovers a new comet or an exploding star.
Professional astronomers usually concentrate their research efforts on one type of object or may not observe the sky at all.
A beginning backyard star-gazer, scanning the nighttime sky for pure enjoyment, may see such an object before anyone else.
Dedicated amateur astronomers observe the sky on a regular basis and take advantage of the vast store of information recorded by others.
Numerous star charts and catalogs in books and software and on Web sites give the positions of objects and predictions for celestial events.
Other guides describe equipment to use and observational techniques.
Many advanced amateurs record data using home computers, light-sensitive electronic equipment, and special photographic emulsions like those of professionals.
A simple joy of amateur astronomy is learning to identify the brighter stars and constellations.
These mark the time of night and the season, and their positions in the sky also depend on the observer’s location.
Knowledge of the distances and natures of stars can add to one’s appreciation of the night sky.
Some important observations can be made with very little equipment.
Observing displays of auroras and meteor showers, for example, requires only the unaided eye.
All one needs is a good clear horizon and dark skies away from city lights and pollution.
It is also simple to photograph auroral displays and, with some luck, to photograph a meteor trail with high-speed film or digital media in a stationary camera on a tripod.
The two most important aspects of a telescope are light-gathering power and magnification.
The larger the area of the light-collecting lens or mirror (called the objective) of a telescope, the more light it gathers, so that fainter objects can be seen.
A larger objective also provides finer detail in an image, permitting use of higher magnification (which makes the image larger).
With binoculars or a small telescope, a person can easily observe many celestial objects not visible to the unaided eye.
The Sun, Moon, planets, and so-called deep-sky objects - nebulae, star clusters, and galaxies - can all be seen with simple instruments.
Observers with such instruments can count sunspots and measure their size and location.
Since the Sun is so bright, the telescope’s main lens or mirror can be quite small.
To avoid severe eye damage, one must never look directly at the Sun with unaided eyes or with a telescope without a proper Sun filter, including during an eclipse (unless the Sun’s disk is totally covered).
During eclipses people may be tempted to look at the Sun when it is partly blocked, but even a very small part of the Sun’s surface remaining visible can damage the retina and cause a permanent blind spot in the eye.
<Caption> Amateur astronomers use two main types of telescopes: reflecting and refracting.
A reflecting telescope uses mirrors to focus light from a distant object, while a refracting telescope uses a lens to do so.
Both types have a lens in the eyepiece to magnify the image formed.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
A good way to view the Sun is by projecting its image through a telescope eyepiece onto a screen or white cardboard.
Another way is to use a Sun filter.
One type covers the entrance of the telescope with thin layers of shiny aluminum.
This material reflects most sunlight, letting only a safe amount through.
The more expensive hydrogen-alpha filter is sometimes included as an integral part of a small telescope.
These filters allow exciting, real-time observation of many details of the Sun’s surface, including flamelike prominences, which appear and dissipate in a matter of hours.
The Moon is a fascinating object to study with a telescope.
Even a magnification of less than 50 power will show numerous craters, mountains, and dark lunar “seas.”
The best place to observe is along the line created by the border between the dark and light portions of the Moon, where sunlight highlights higher elevations.
Lunar eclipses are always safe to view because moonlight is much less intense than sunlight.
<Caption> People point toward Mars as a boy focuses a telescope at Nehru Planetarium in New Delhi, India, in 2003.
Prakash Singh/AFP/Getty Images
Planets are best viewed with a telescope of 100 to 300 power.
These higher magnifications generally require an objective lens or mirror 3 inches (76 millimeters) or more in diameter to maintain adequate brightness and detail.
Good and often moderately priced telescopes of this size can easily show features such as Saturn’s rings, Jupiter’s cloud belts and large moons, and Mars’s polar ice caps.
Some amateur astronomers use color filters to increase the contrast of planetary features by subtracting some colors of light from the image.
A yellow or blue filter, for example, might highlight patterns in Jupiter’s clouds, while a red filter might enhance the dark areas on the surface of Mars.
Huge advances in our understanding of the universe have come in recent years, but many questions remain.
Will the big bang scenario continue to account for new data gathered on the universe’s structure?
Does life exist elsewhere in the universe than on planet Earth - or has it ever existed beyond Earth in the past?
Will scientists be able to more thoroughly describe the universe at its earliest instants?
What caused the universe to come into existence in the first place, and are there other such universes?
Some of these questions may never be answered with certainty, but astronomers and cosmologists will continue to seek answers.
If history is any indicator, surprises may well await us.