Mr. Kesselbach stopped short on the threshold of the sitting-room, took his secretary's arm and, in an anxious voice, whispered:
"Chapman, some one has been here again."
"Surely not, sir," protested the secretary.
"You have just opened the hall-door yourself; and the key never left your pocket while we were lunching in the restaurant."
"Chapman, some one has been here again," Mr. Kesselbach repeated.
He pointed to a traveling-bag on the mantelpiece.
"Look, I can prove it.
That bag was shut.
It is now open."
Chapman protested.
"Are you quite sure that you shut it, sir?
Besides, the bag contains nothing but odds and ends of no value, articles of dress..."
"It contains nothing else, because I took my pocket-book out before we went down, by way of precaution...
But for that... No, Chapman, I tell you, some one has been here while we were at lunch."
There was a telephone on the wall.
He took down the receiver:
"Hallo!
...
I'm Mr. Kesselbach... Suite 415 ... That's right... Mademoiselle, would you please put me on to the Prefecture of Police ... the detective department...
I know the number ... one second ... Ah, here it is!
Number 822.48...
I'll hold the line."
A moment later he continued:
"Are you 822.48? I should like a word with M. Lenormand, the chief of the detective-service. My name's Kesselbach... Hullo! ... Yes, the chief detective knows what it's about. He has given me leave to ring him up... Oh, he's not there? ... To whom am I speaking?
... Detective-sergeant Gourel? ...
You were there yesterday, were you not, when I called on M. Lenormand?
Well, the same thing that I told M. Lenormand yesterday has occurred again to-day... Some one has entered the suite which I am occupying.
And, if you come at once, you may be able to discover some clues... In an hour or two?
All right; thanks... You have only to ask for suite 415... Thank you again."
Rudolf Kesselbach, nicknamed alternatively the King of Diamonds and the Lord of the Cape, possessed a fortune estimated at nearly twenty millions sterling.
For the past week, he had occupied suite 415, on the fourth floor of the Palace Hotel, consisting of three rooms, of which the two larger, on the right, the sitting-room and the principal bedroom, faced the avenue; while the other, on the left, in which Chapman, the secretary, slept, looked out on the Rue de Jud&#233;e.
Adjoining this bedroom, a suite of five rooms had been reserved for Mrs. Kesselbach, who was to leave Monte Carlo, where she was at present staying, and join her husband the moment she heard from him.
Rudolf Kesselbach walked up and down for a few minutes with a thoughtful air.
He was a tall man, with a ruddy complexion, and still young; and his dreamy eyes, which showed pale blue through his gold-rimmed spectacles, gave him an expression of gentleness and shyness that contrasted curiously with the strength of the square forehead and the powerfully-developed jaws.
He went to the window: it was fastened.
Besides, how could any one have entered that way?
The private balcony that ran round the flat broke off on the right and was separated on the left by a stone channel from the balconies in the Rue de Jud&#233;e.
He went to his bedroom: it had no communication with the neighboring rooms.
He went to his secretary's bedroom: the door that led into the five rooms reserved for Mrs. Kesselbach was locked and bolted.
"I can't understand it at all, Chapman.
Time after time I have noticed things here ... funny things, as you must admit.
Yesterday, my walking-stick was moved...
The day before that, my papers had certainly been touched... And yet how was it possible?
...
"It is not possible, sir!" cried Chapman, whose honest, placid features displayed no anxiety. "You're imagining things, that's all... You have no proof, nothing but impressions, to go upon... Besides, look here: there is no way into this suite except through the entrance-lobby. Very well.
You had a special key made on the day of our arrival: and your own man, Edwards, has the only duplicate.
Do you trust him?"
"Of course I do!
...
He's been with me for ten years!
...
But Edwards goes to lunch at the same time that we do; and that's a mistake.
He must not go down, in future, until we come back."
Chapman gave a slight shrug of the shoulders. There was no doubt about it, the Lord of the Cape was becoming a trifle eccentric, with those incomprehensible fears of his.
What risk can you run in an hotel, especially when you carry no valuables, no important sum of money on you or with you?
They heard the hall-door opening.
It was Edwards.
Mr. Kesselbach called him:
"Are you dressed, Edwards?
Ah, that's right!
...
I am expecting no visitors to-day, Edwards ... or, rather, one visitor only, M. Gourel.
Meantime, remain in the lobby and keep an eye on the door.
Mr. Chapman and I have some serious work to do."
The serious work lasted for a few minutes, during which Mr. Kesselbach went through his correspondence, read three or four letters and gave instructions how they were to be answered. But, suddenly, Chapman, waiting with pen poised, saw that Mr. Kesselbach was thinking of something quite different from his correspondence.
He was holding between his fingers and attentively examining a pin, a black pin bent like a fish-hook:
"Chapman," he said, "look what I've found on the table.
This bent pin obviously means something.
It's a proof, a material piece of evidence.
You can't pretend now that no one has been in the room.
For, after all, this pin did not come here of itself."
"Certainly not," replied the secretary.
"It came here through me."
"What do you mean?"
"Why, it's a pin which I used to fasten my tie to my collar.
I took it out last night, while you were reading, and I twisted it mechanically."
Mr. Kesselbach rose from his chair, with a great air of vexation, took a few steps and stopped.
"You're laughing at me, Chapman, I feel you are ... and you're quite right... I won't deny it, I have been rather ... odd, since my last journey to the Cape.
It's because ... well ... you don't know the new factor in my life ... a tremendous plan ... a huge thing ...
I can only see it, as yet, in the haze of the future ... but it's taking shape for all that ... and it will be something colossal... Ah, Chapman, you can't imagine... Money I don't care a fig for: I have money, I have too much money...
But this, this means a great deal more; it means power, might, authority.
If the reality comes up to my expectations, I shall be not only Lord of the Cape, but lord of other realms as well... Rudolf Kesselbach, the son of the Augsburg ironmonger, will be on a par with many people who till now have looked down upon him...
He will even take precedence of them, Chapman; he will, take precedence of them, mark my words ... and, if ever I ..."
He interrupted himself, looked at Chapman as though he regretted having said too much and, nevertheless, carried away by his excitement, concluded:
"You now understand the reasons of my anxiety, Chapman...
Here, in this brain, is an idea that is worth a great deal ... and this idea is suspected perhaps ... and I am being spied upon...
I'm convinced of it..."
A bell sounded.
"The telephone," said Chapman.
"Could it," muttered Kesselbach, "by any chance be ... ?" He took down the instrument. "Hullo! ... Who? The Colonel? Ah, good! Yes, it's I... Any news? ... Good! ... Then I shall expect you... You will come with one of your men? Very well... What?
No, we shan't be disturbed... I will give the necessary orders... It's as serious as that, is it? ...
I tell you, my instructions will be positive... my secretary and my man shall keep the door; and no one shall be allowed in... You know the way, don't you?
... Then don't lose a minute."
He hung up the receiver and said:
"Chapman, there are two gentlemen coming.
Edwards will show them in..."
"But M. Gourel ... the detective-sergeant...
?"
"He will come later ... in an hour... And, even then, there's no harm in their meeting. So send Edwards down to the office at once, to tell them. I am at home to nobody ... except two gentlemen, the Colonel and his friend, and M. Gourel.
He must make them take down the names."
Chapman did as he was asked. When he returned to the room, he found Mr. Kesselbach holding in his hand an envelope, or, rather, a little pocket-case, in black morocco leather, apparently empty. He seemed to hesitate, as though he did not know what to do with it.
Should he put it in his pocket or lay it down elsewhere?
At last he went to the mantelpiece and threw the leather envelope into his traveling-bag:
"Let us finish the mail, Chapman.
We have ten minutes left.
Ah, a letter from Mrs. Kesselbach!
Why didn't you tell me of it, Chapman?
Didn't you recognize the handwriting?"
He made no attempt to conceal the emotion which he felt in touching and contemplating that paper which his wife had held in her fingers and to which she had added a look of her eyes, an atom of her scent, a suggestion of her secret thoughts.
He inhaled its perfume and, unsealing it, read the letter slowly in an undertone, in fragments that reached Chapman's ears:
"Feeling a little tired... Shall keep my room to-day...
I feel so bored...
When can I come to you?
I am longing for your wire..."
"You telegraphed this morning, Chapman?
Then Mrs. Kesselbach will be here to-morrow, Wednesday."
He seemed quite gay, as though the weight of his business had been suddenly relieved and he freed from all anxiety.
He rubbed his hands and heaved a deep breath, like a strong man certain of success, like a lucky man who possessed happiness and who was big enough to defend himself.
"There's some one ringing, Chapman, some one ringing at the hall door.
Go and see who it is."
But Edwards entered and said:
"Two gentlemen asking for you, sir.
They are the ones..."
"I know.
Are they there, in the lobby?"
"Yes, sir."
"Close the hall-door and don't open it again except to M. Gourel, the detective-sergeant.
You go and bring the gentlemen in, Chapman, and tell them that I would like to speak to the Colonel first, to the Colonel alone."
Edwards and Chapman left the room, shutting the door after them.
Rudolf Kesselbach went to the window and pressed his forehead against the glass.
Outside, just below his eyes, the carriages and motor-cars rolled along in parallel furrows, marked by the double line of refuges. A bright spring sun made the brass-work and the varnish gleam again.
The trees were putting forth their first green shoots; and the buds of the tall chestnuts were beginning to unfold their new-born leaves.
"What on earth is Chapman doing?"
muttered Kesselbach.
"The time he wastes in palavering!
..."
He took a cigarette from the table, lit it and drew a few puffs.
A faint exclamation escaped him.
Close before him stood a man whom he did not know.
He started back:
"Who are you?"
The man - he was a well-dressed individual, rather smart-looking, with dark hair, a dark moustache and hard eyes - the man gave a grin:
"Who am I?
Why, the Colonel!"
"No, no...
The one I call the Colonel, the one who writes to me under that ... adopted ... signature ... is not you!"
"Yes, yes ... the other was only ...
But, my dear sir, all this, you know, is not of the smallest importance.
The essential thing is that I ... am myself.
And that, I assure you, I am!"
"But your name, sir?
..."
"The Colonel ... until further orders."
Mr. Kesselbach was seized with a growing fear.
Who was this man?
What did he want with him?
He called out:
"Chapman!"
"What a funny idea, to call out!
Isn't my company enough for you?"
"Chapman!"
Mr. Kesselbach cried again.
"Chapman!
Edwards!"
"Chapman!
Edwards!"
echoed the stranger, in his turn.
"What are you doing?
You're wanted!"
"Sir, I ask you, I order you to let me pass."
"But, my dear sir, who's preventing you?"
He politely made way.
Mr. Kesselbach walked to the door, opened it and gave a sudden jump backward.
Behind the door stood another man, pistol in hand.
Kesselbach stammered:
"Edwards ... Chap ..."
He did not finish.
In a corner of the lobby he saw his secretary and his servant lying side by side on the floor, gagged and bound.
Mr. Kesselbach, notwithstanding his nervous and excitable nature, was not devoid of physical courage; and the sense of a definite danger, instead of depressing him, restored all his elasticity and vigor. Pretending dismay and stupefaction, he moved slowly back to the chimneypiece and leant against the wall.
His hand felt for the electric bell.
He found it and pressed the button without removing his finger.
"Well?"
asked the stranger.
Mr. Kesselbach made no reply and continued to press the button.
"Well?
Do you expect they will come, that the whole hotel is in commotion, because you are pressing that bell?
Why, my dear sir, look behind you and you will see that the wire is cut!"
Mr. Kesselbach turned round sharply, as though he wanted to make sure; but, instead, with a quick movement, he seized the traveling-bag, thrust his hand into it, grasped a revolver, aimed it at the man and pulled the trigger.
"Whew!"
said the stranger.
"So you load your weapons with air and silence?"
The cock clicked a second time and a third, but there was no report.
"Three shots more, Lord of the Cape!
I shan't be satisfied till you've lodged six bullets in my carcass.
What!
You give up?
That's a pity ... you were making excellent practice!"
He took hold of a chair by the back, spun it round, sat down a-straddle and, pointing to an arm-chair, said:
"Won't you take a seat, my dear sir, and make yourself at home?
A cigarette?
Not for me, thanks: I prefer a cigar."
There was a box on the table: he selected an Upmann, light in color and flawless in shape, lit it and, with a bow:
"Thank you!
That's a perfect cigar.
And now let's have a chat, shall we?"
Rudolf Kesselbach listened to him in amazement. Who could this strange person be? ...
Still, at the sight of his visitor sitting there so quiet and so chatty, he became gradually reassured and began to think that the situation might come to an end without any need to resort to violence or brute force.
He took out a pocket-book, opened it, displayed a respectable bundle of bank-notes and asked:
"How much?"
The other looked at him with an air of bewilderment, as though he found a difficulty in understanding what Kesselbach meant.
Then, after a moment, he called:
"Marco!"
The man with the revolver stepped forward.
"Marco, this gentleman is good enough to offer you a few bits of paper for your young woman.
Take them, Marco."
Still aiming his revolver with his right hand, Marco put out his left, took the notes and withdrew.
"Now that this question is settled according to your wishes," resumed the stranger, "let us come to the object of my visit. I will be brief and to the point. I want two things.
In the first place, a little black morocco pocket-case, shaped like an envelope, which you generally carry on you.
Secondly, a small ebony box, which was in that traveling-bag yesterday.
Let us proceed in order.
The morocco case?"
"Burnt."
The stranger knit his brows.
He must have had a vision of the good old days when there were peremptory methods of making the contumacious speak:
"Very well.
We shall see about that.
And the ebony box?"
"Burnt."
"Ah," he growled, "you're getting at me, my good man!" He twisted the other's arm with a pitiless hand. "Yesterday, Rudolf Kesselbach, you walked into the Crédit Lyonnais, on the Boulevard des Italiens, hiding a parcel under your overcoat. You hired a safe ... let us be exact: safe No.
16, in recess No.
9.
After signing the book and paying your safe-rent, you went down to the basement; and, when you came up again, you no longer had your parcel with you.
Is that correct?"
"Quite."
"Then the box and the pocket-case are at the Crédit Lyonnais?"
"No."
"Give me the key of your safe."
"No."
"Marco!"
Marco ran up.
"Look sharp, Marco!
The quadruple knot!"
Before he had even time to stand on the defensive, Rudolf Kesselbach was tied up in a network of cords that cut into his flesh at the least attempt which he made to struggle.
His arms were fixed behind his back, his body fastened to the chair and his legs tied together like the legs of a mummy.
"Search him, Marco."
Marco searched him.
Two minutes after, he handed his chief a little flat, nickel-plated key, bearing the numbers 16 and 9.
"Capital.
No morocco pocket-case?"
"No, governor."
"It is in the safe.
Mr. Kesselbach, will you tell me the secret cypher that opens the lock?"
"No."
"You refuse?"
"Yes."
"Marco!"
"Yes, governor."
"Place the barrel of your revolver against the gentleman's temple."
"It's there."
"Now put your finger to the trigger."
"Ready."
"Well, Kesselbach, old chap, do you intend to speak?"
"No."
"I'll give you ten seconds, and not one more.
Marco!"
"Yes, governor."
"In ten seconds, blow out the gentleman's brains."
"Right you are, governor."
"Kesselbach, I'm counting.
One, two, three, four, five, six ..."
Rudolph Kesselbach made a sign.
"You want to speak?"
"Yes."
"You're just in time.
Well, the cypher ... the word for the lock?"
"Dolor."
"Dolor ... Dolor ... Mrs. Kesselbach's name is Dolores, I believe? You dear boy! ... Marco, go and do as I told you... No mistake, mind! I'll repeat it: meet J&#233;r&#244;me at the omnibus office, give him the key, tell him the word: Dolor.
Then, the two of you, go to the Cr&#233;dit Lyonnais.
J&#233;r&#244;me is to walk in alone, sign the name-book, go down to the basement and bring away everything in the safe.
Do you quite understand?"
"Yes, governor.
But if the safe shouldn't open; if the word Dolor ..."
"Silence, Marco. When you come out of the Cr&#233;dit Lyonnais, you must leave J&#233;r&#244;me, go to your own place and telephone the result of the operation to me.
Should the word Dolor by any chance fail to open the safe, we (my friend Rudolf Kesselbach and I) will have one ... last ... interview.
Kesselbach, you're quite sure you're not mistaken?"
"Yes."
"That means that you rely upon the futility of the search.
We shall see.
Be off, Marco!"
"What about you, governor?"
"I shall stay.
Oh, I'm not afraid!
I've never been in less danger than at this moment.
Your orders about the door were positive, Kesselbach, were they not?"
"Yes."
"Dash it all, you seemed very eager to get that said! Can you have been trying to gain time?
If so, I should be caught in a trap like a fool..." He stopped to think, looked at his prisoner and concluded, "No ... it's not possible ... we shall not be disturbed ..."
He had not finished speaking, when the door-bell rang.
He pressed his hand violently on Rudolf Kesselbach's mouth:
"Oh, you old fox, you were expecting some one!"
The captive's eyes gleamed with hope.
He could be heard chuckling under the hand that stifled him.
The stranger shook with rage:
"Hold your tongue, or I'll strangle you!
Here, Marco, gag him!
Quick!
... That's it!"
The bell rang again.
He shouted, as though he himself were Kesselbach and as though Edwards were still there:
"Why don't you open the door, Edwards?"
Then he went softly into the lobby and, pointing to the secretary and the manservant, whispered:
"Marco, help me shift these two into the bedroom ... over there ... so that they can't be seen."
He lifted the secretary.
Marco carried the servant.
"Good!
Now go back to the sitting-room."
He followed him in and at once returned to the lobby and said, in a loud tone of astonishment:
"Why, your man's not here, Mr. Kesselbach... No, don't move ... finish your letter...
I'll go myself."
And he quietly opened the hall-door.
"Mr.
Kesselbach?"
He found himself faced by a sort of jovial, bright-eyed giant, who stood swinging from one foot to the other and twisting the brim of his hat between his fingers.
He answered:
"Yes, that's right.
Who shall I say...
?"
"Mr. Kesselbach telephoned...
He expects me..."
"Oh, it's you...
I'll tell him... Do you mind waiting a minute?
... Mr. Kesselbach will speak to you."
He had the audacity to leave the visitor standing on the threshold of the little entrance-hall, at a place from which he could see a portion of the sitting-room through the open door, and, slowly, without so much as turning round, he entered the room, went to his confederate by Mr. Kesselbach's side and whispered:
"We're done!
It's Gourel, the detective..."
The other drew his knife.
He caught him by the arm:
"No nonsense!
I have an idea.
But, for God's sake, Marco, understand me and speak in your turn.
Speak as if you were Kesselbach... You hear, Marco!
You are Kesselbach."
He expressed himself so coolly, so forcibly and with such authority that Marco understood, without further explanation, that he himself was to play the part of Kesselbach.
Marco said, so as to be heard:
"You must apologize for me, my dear fellow.
Tell M. Gourel I'm awfully sorry, but I'm over head and ears in work...
I will see him to-morrow morning, at nine ... yes, at nine o'clock punctually."
"Good!"
whispered the other.
"Don't stir."
He went back to the lobby, found Gourel waiting, and said:
"Mr. Kesselbach begs you to excuse him.
He is finishing an important piece of work.
Could you possibly come back at nine o'clock to-morrow morning?"
There was a pause.
Gourel seemed surprised, more or less bothered and undecided.
The other man's hand clutched the handle of a knife at the bottom of his pocket.
At the first suspicious movement, he was prepared to strike.
At last, Gourel said:
"Very well... At nine o'clock to-morrow...
But, all the same ...
However, I shall be here at nine to-morrow..."
And, putting on his hat, he disappeared down the passage of the hotel.
Marco, in the sitting-room, burst out laughing:
"That was jolly clever of you, governor!
Oh, how nicely you spoofed him!"
"Look alive, Marco, and follow him.
If he leaves the hotel, let him be, meet J&#233;r&#244;me at the omnibus-office as arranged ... and telephone."
Marco went away quickly.
Then the man took a water-bottle on the chimneypiece, poured himself out a tumblerful, which he swallowed at a draught, wetted his handkerchief, dabbed his forehead, which was covered with perspiration, and then sat down beside his prisoner and, with an affectation of politeness, said:
"But I must really have the honor, Mr. Kesselbach, of introducing myself to you."
And, taking a card from his pocket, he said: "Allow me... Ars&#232;ne Lupin, gentleman-burglar."
The name of the famous adventurer seemed to make the best of impressions upon Mr. Kesselbach.
Lupin did not fail to observe the fact and exclaimed:
"Aha, my dear sir, you breathe again! Ars&#232;ne Lupin is a delicate, squeamish burglar. He loathes bloodshed, he has never committed a more serious crime than that of annexing other people's property ... a mere peccadillo, eh?
And what you're saying to yourself is that he is not going to burden his conscience with a useless murder.
Quite so... But will your destruction be so useless as all that?
Everything depends on the answer.
And I assure you that I'm not larking at present.
Come on, old chap!"
He drew up his chair beside the arm-chair, removed the prisoner's gag and, speaking very plainly:
"Mr. Kesselbach," he said, "on the day when you arrived in Paris you entered into relations with one Barbareux, the manager of a confidential inquiry agency; and, as you were acting without the knowledge of your secretary, Chapman, it was arranged that the said Barbareux, when communicating with you by letter or telephone, should call himself 'the Colonel.'
I hasten to tell you that Barbareux is a perfectly honest man.
But I have the good fortune to number one of his clerks among my own particular friends.
That is how I discovered the motive of your application to Barbareux and how I came to interest myself in you and to make a search or two here, with the assistance of a set of false keys ... in the course of which search or two, I may as well tell you, I did not find what I was looking for."
He lowered his voice and, with his eyes fixed on the eyes of his prisoner, watching his expression, searching his secret thoughts, he uttered these words:
"Mr. Kesselbach, your instructions to Barbareux were that he should find a man hidden somewhere in the slums of Paris who bears or used to bear the name of Pierre Leduc. The man answers to this brief description: height, five feet nine inches; hair and complexion, fair; wears a moustache.
Special mark: the tip of the little finger of the left hand is missing, as the result of a cut.
Also, he has an almost imperceptible scar on the right cheek.
You seem to attach enormous importance to this man's discovery, as though it might lead to some great advantage to yourself.
Who is the man?"
"I don't know."
The answer was positive, absolute.
Did he know or did he not know?
It made little difference.
The great thing was that he was determined not to speak.
"Very well," said his adversary, "but you have fuller particulars about him than those with which you furnished Barbareux."
"I have not."
"You lie, Mr. Kesselbach.
Twice, in Barbareux's presence, you consulted papers contained in the morocco case."
"I did."
"And the case?"
"Burnt."
Lupin quivered with rage.
The thought of torture and of the facilities which it used to offer was evidently passing through his mind again.
"Burnt?
But the box?
... Come, own up ... confess that the box is at the Cr&#233;dit Lyonnais."
"Yes."
"And what's inside it?"
"The finest two hundred diamonds in my private collection."
This statement did not seem to displease the adventurer.
"Aha, the finest two hundred diamonds!
But, I say, that's a fortune!
...
Yes, that makes you smile...
It's a trifle to you, no doubt... And your secret is worth more than that... To you, yes ... but to me?
..."
He took a cigar, lit a match, which he allowed to go out again mechanically, and sat for some time thinking, motionless.
The minutes passed.
He began to laugh:
"I dare say you're hoping that the expedition will come to nothing and that they won't open the safe? ... Very likely, old chap! But, in that case, you'll have to pay me for my trouble.
I did not come here to see what sort of figure you cut in an arm-chair... The diamonds, since diamonds there appear to be ... or else the morocco case... There's your dilemma."
He looked at his watch. "
Half an hour... Hang it all! ...
Fate is moving very slowly...
But there's nothing for you to grin at, Mr. Kesselbach.
I shall not go back empty-handed, make no mistake about that! ...
At last!"
It was the telephone-bell.
Lupin snatched at the receiver and, changing the sound of his voice, imitated the rough accent of his prisoner:
"Yes, Rudolf Kesselbach ... you're speaking to him... Yes, please, mademoiselle, put me on... Is that you, Marco? ... Good... Did it go off all right? ... Excellent! ... No hitch? ... My best compliments! ... Well, what did you pick up? ... The ebony box? ... Nothing else?
... No papers? ...
Tut, tut! ...
And what's in the box? ...
Are they fine diamonds? ...
Capital, capital! ...
One minute, Marco, while I think... You see, all this... If I were to tell you my opinion... Wait, don't go away ... hold the line..."
He turned round.
"Mr. Kesselbach, are you keen on your diamonds?"
"Yes."
"Would you buy them back of me?"
"Possibly."
"For how much?
Five hundred thousand francs?"
"Five hundred thousand ...
yes."
"Only, here's the rub: how are we to make the exchange? A cheque? No, you'd swindle me ... or else I'd swindle you... Listen.
On the day after to-morrow, go to the Cr&#233;dit Lyonnais in the morning, draw out your five hundred bank-notes of a thousand each and go for a walk in the Bois, on the Auteuil side... I shall have the diamonds in a bag: that's handier... The box shows too much..."
Kesselbach gave a start:
"No, no ... the box, too...
I want everything..."
"Ah," cried Lupin, shouting with laughter, "you've fallen into the trap! ... The diamonds you don't care about ... they can be replaced... But you cling to that box as you cling to your skin...
Very well, you shall have your box ... on the word of Ars&#232;ne ... you shall have it to-morrow morning, by parcel post!"
He went back to the telephone:
"Marco, have you the box in front of you? ... Is there anything particular about it? ... Ebony inlaid with ivory... Yes, I know the sort of thing... Japanese, from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine... No mark? ... Ah, a little round label, with a blue border and a number! ...
Yes, a shop-mark ... no importance.
And is the bottom of the box thick? ...
Not very thick... Bother!
No false bottom, then? ...
Look here, Marco: just examine the ivory inlay on the outside ... or, rather, no, the lid."
He reveled with delight. "
The lid!
That's it, Marco!
Kesselbach blinked his eyes just now... We're burning! ...
Ah, Kesselbach, old chap, didn't you see me squinting at you?
You silly fellow!"
And, to Marco, "Well, what do you see? ...
A looking-glass inside the lid? ...
Does it slide? ...
Is it on hinges? ...
No!
... Well, then, break it... Yes, yes, I tell you to break it... That glass serves no purpose there ... it's been added since!"
He lost patience. "
Mind your own business, idiot! ...
Do as I say! ..."
He must have heard the noise which Marco made at the other end of the wire in breaking the glass, for he shouted, in triumph.
"Didn't I tell you, Mr. Kesselbach, that we should find something?
... Hullo!
Have you done it?
... Well?
... A letter?
Victory!
All the diamonds in the Cape and old man Kesselbach's secret into the bargain!"
He took down the second receiver, carefully put the two discs to his ears and continued:
"Read it to me, Marco, read it to me slowly... The envelope first... Good... Now, repeat." He himself repeated, "'Copy of the letter contained in the black morocco case.' And next? Tear the envelope, Marco... Have I your permission, Mr. Kesselbach?
It's not very good form, but, however ... Go on, Marco, Mr. Kesselbach gives you leave... Done it? ...
Well, then, read it out."
He listened and, with a chuckle:
"The deuce! That's not quite as clear as a pikestaff! Listen. I'll repeat: a plain sheet of paper folded in four, the folds apparently quite fresh... Good... At the top of the page, on the right, these words: 'Five feet nine, left little finger cut.' And so on...
Yes, that's the description of Master Pierre Leduc.
In Kesselbach's handwriting, I suppose? ...
Good... And, in the middle of the page, this word in printed capitals: 'APOON.'
Marco, my lad, leave the paper as it is and don't touch the box or the diamonds.
I shall have done with our friend here in ten minutes and I shall be with you in twenty... Oh, by the way, did you send back the motor for me?
Capital!
So long!"
He replaced the instrument, went into the lobby and into the bedroom, made sure that the secretary and the manservant had not unloosed their bonds and, on the other hand, that they were in no danger of being choked by their gags.
Then he returned to his chief prisoner.
He wore a determined and relentless look:
"We've finished joking, Kesselbach.
If you don't speak, it will be the worse for you.
Have you made up your mind?"
"What about?"
"No nonsense, please.
Tell me what you know."
"I know nothing."
"You lie.
What does this word 'APOON' mean?"
"If I knew, I should not have written it down."
"Very well; but whom or what does it refer to?
Where did you copy it?
Where did you get it from?"
Mr. Kesselbach made no reply.
Lupin, now speaking in nervous, jerky tones, resumed:
"Listen, Kesselbach, I have a proposal to make to you. Rich man, big man though you may be, there is not so much difference between us. The son of the Augsburg ironmonger and Ars&#232;ne Lupin, prince of burglars, can come to an understanding without shame on either side.
I do my thieving indoors; you do yours on the Stock Exchange.
It's all much of a muchness.
So here we are, Kesselbach.
Let's be partners in this business.
I have need of you, because I don't know what it's about.
You have need of me, because you will never be able to manage it alone.
Barbareux is an ass.
I am Lupin.
Is it a bargain?"
No answer.
Lupin persisted, in a voice shaking with intensity:
"Answer, Kesselbach, is it a bargain?
If so, I'll find your Pierre Leduc for you in forty-eight hours.
For he's the man you're after, eh?
Isn't that the business?
Come along, answer!
Who is the fellow?
Why are you looking for him?
What do you know about him?"
He calmed himself suddenly, laid his hand on Kesselbach's shoulder and, harshly:
"One word only.
Yes or no?"
"No!"
He drew a magnificent gold watch from Kesselbach's fob and placed it on the prisoner's knees.
He unbuttoned Kesselbach's waistcoat, opened his shirt, uncovered his chest and, taking a steel dagger, with a gold-crusted handle, that lay on the table beside him, he put the point of it against the place where the pulsations of the heart made the bare flesh throb:
"For the last time?"
"No!"
"Mr. Kesselbach, it is eight minutes to three.
If you don't answer within eight minutes from now, you are a dead man!"
The next morning, Sergeant Gourel walked into the Palace Hotel punctually at the appointed hour.
Without stopping, scorning to take the lift, he went up the stairs.
On the fourth floor he turned to the right, followed the passage and rang at the door of 415.
Hearing no sound, he rang again.
After half-a-dozen fruitless attempts, he went to the floor office.
He found a head-waiter there:
"Mr. Kesselbach did not sleep here last night.
We have not seen him since yesterday afternoon."
"But his servant?
His secretary?"
"We have not seen them either."
"Then they also did not sleep in the hotel?"
"I suppose not."
"You suppose not?
But you ought to be certain."
"Why?
Mr. Kesselbach is not staying in the hotel; he is at home here, in his private flat.
He is not waited on by us, but by his own man; and we know nothing of what happens inside."
"That's true... That's true..."
Gourel seemed greatly perplexed.
He had come with positive orders, a precise mission, within the limits of which his mind was able to exert itself.
Outside those limits he did not quite know how to act:
"If the chief were here," he muttered, "if the chief were here..."
He showed his card and stated his quality.
Then he said, on the off-chance:
"So you have not seen them come in?"
"No."
"But you saw them go out?"
"No, I can't say I did."
"In that case, how do you know that they went out?"
"From a gentleman who called yesterday afternoon."
"A gentleman with a dark mustache?"
"Yes.
I met him as he was going away, about three o'clock.
He said: 'The people in 415 have gone out.
Mr. Kesselbach will stay at Versailles to-night, at the Reservoirs; you can send his letters on to him there.'"
"But who was this gentleman?
By what right did he speak?"
"I don't know."
Gourel felt uneasy.
It all struck him as rather queer.
"Have you the key?"
"No.
Mr. Kesselbach had special keys made."
"Let's go and look."
Gourel rang again furiously.
Nothing happened.
He was about to go when, suddenly, he bent down and clapped his ear to the keyhole:
"Listen...
I seem to hear ... Why, yes ... it's quite distinct...
I hear moans..."
He gave the door a tremendous blow with his fist.
"But, sir, you have not the right ..."
"Oh, hang the right!"
He struck the door with renewed force, but to so little purpose that he abandoned the attempt forthwith:
"Quick, quick, a locksmith!"
One of the waiters started off at a run.
Gourel, blustering and undecided, walked to and fro.
The servants from the other floors collected in groups.
People from the office, from the manager's department arrived.
Gourel cried:
"But why shouldn't we go in though the adjoining rooms?
Do they communicate with this suite?"
"Yes; but the communicating doors are always bolted on both sides."
"Then I shall telephone to the detective-office," said Gourel, to whose mind obviously there existed no salvation without his chief.
"And to the commissary of police," observed some one.
"Yes, if you like," he replied, in the tone of a gentleman who took little or no interest in that formality.
When he returned from the telephone, the locksmith had nearly finished trying the keys.
The last worked the lock.
Gourel walked briskly in.
He at once hastened in the direction from which the moans came and hit against the bodies of Chapman the secretary, and Edwards the manservant. One of them, Chapman, had succeeded, by dint of patience, in loosening his gag a little and was uttering short, stifled moans.
The other seemed asleep.
They were released.
But Gourel was anxious:
"Where's Mr.
Kesselbach?"
He went into the sitting-room.
Mr. Kesselbach was sitting strapped to the back of the arm-chair, near the table.
His head hung on his chest.
"He has fainted," said Gourel, going up to him.
"He must have exerted himself beyond his strength."
Swiftly he cut the cords that fastened the shoulders.
The body fell forward in an inert mass.
Gourel caught it in his arms and started back with a cry of horror:
"Why, he's dead!
Feel ... his hands are ice-cold!
And look at his eyes!"
Some one ventured the opinion:
"An apoplectic stroke, no doubt ... or else heart-failure."
"True, there's no sign of a wound ... it's a natural death."
They laid the body on the sofa and unfastened the clothes.
But red stains at once appeared on the white shirt; and, when they pushed it back, they saw that, near the heart, the chest bore a little scratch through which had trickled a thin stream of blood.
And on the shirt was pinned a card.
Gourel bent forward.
It was Ars&#232;ne Lupin's card, bloodstained like the rest.
Then Gourel drew himself up, authoritatively and sharply:
"Murdered!
... Ars&#232;ne Lupin!
... Leave the flat... Leave the flat, all of you!
... No one must stay here or in the bedroom... Let the two men be removed and seen to elsewhere!
... Leave the flat ... and don't touch a thing ...
"The chief is on his way!
..."
"Arsène Lupin!"
Gourel repeated these two fateful words with an absolutely petrified air.
They rang within him like a knell.
Arsène Lupin!
The great, the formidable Arsène Lupin.
The burglar-king, the mighty adventurer!
Was it possible?
"No, no," he muttered, "it's not possible, because he's dead!"
Only that was just it ... was he really dead?
Arsène Lupin!
Standing beside the corpse, he remained dull and stunned, turning the card over and over with a certain dread, as though he had been challenged by a ghost. Arsène Lupin! What ought he to do? Act? Take the field with his resources? No, no ... better not act ...
He was bound to make mistakes if he entered the lists with an adversary of that stamp.
Besides, the chief was on his way!
The chief was on his way! All Gourel's intellectual philosophy was summed up in that short sentence.
An able, persevering officer, full of courage and experience and endowed with Herculean strength, he was one of those who go ahead only when obeying directions and who do good work only when ordered.
And this lack of initiative had become still more marked since M. Lenormand had taken the place of M. Dudouis in the detective-service.
M. Lenormand was a chief indeed!
With him, one was sure of being on the right track.
So sure, even, that Gourel stopped the moment that the chief's incentive was no longer behind him.
But the chief was on his way! Gourel took out his watch and calculated the exact time when he would arrive.
If only the commissary of police did not get there first, if only the examining-magistrate, who was no doubt already appointed, or the divisional surgeon, did not come to make inopportune discoveries before the chief had time to fix the essential points of the case in his mind!
"Well, Gourel, what are you dreaming about?"
"The chief!"
M. Lenormand was still a young man, if you took stock only of the expression of his face and his eyes gleaming through his spectacles; but he was almost an old man when you saw his bent back, his skin dry and yellow as wax, his grizzled hair and beard, his whole decrepit, hesitating, unhealthy appearance.
He had spent his life laboriously in the colonies as government commissary, in the most dangerous posts.
He had there acquired a series of fevers; an indomitable energy, notwithstanding his physical weariness; the habit of living alone, of talking little and acting in silence; a certain misanthropy; and, suddenly, at the age of fifty-five, in consequence of the famous case of the three Spaniards at Biskra, a great and well-earned notoriety.
The injustice was then repaired; and he was straightway transferred to Bordeaux, was next appointed deputy in Paris, and lastly, on the death of M. Dudouis, chief of the detective-service.
And in each of these posts he displayed such a curious faculty of inventiveness in his proceedings, such resourcefulness, so many new and original qualities; and above all, he achieved such correct results in the conduct of the last four or five cases with which public opinion had been stirred, that his name was quoted in the same breath with those of the most celebrated detectives.
Gourel, for his part, had no hesitation.
Himself a favourite of the chief, who liked him for his frankness and his passive obedience, he set the chief above them all.
The chief to him was an idol, an infallible god.
M. Lenormand seemed more tired than usual that day.
He sat down wearily, parted the tails of his frock-coat - an old frock-coat, famous for its antiquated cut and its olive-green hue - untied his neckerchief - an equally famous maroon-coloured neckerchief, rested his two hands on his stick, and said:
"Speak!"
Gourel told all that he had seen, and all that he had learnt, and told it briefly, according to the habit which the chief had taught him.
But, when he produced Lupin's card, M. Lenormand gave a start:
"Lupin!"
"Yes, Lupin.
The brute's bobbed up again."
"That's all right, that's all right," said M. Lenormand, after a moment's thought.
"That's all right, of course," said Gourel, who loved to add a word of his own to the rare speeches of a superior whose only fault in his eyes was an undue reticence.
"That's all right, for at last you will measure your strength with an adversary worthy of you... And Lupin will meet his master... Lupin will cease to exist... Lupin ..."
"Ferret!"
said M. Lenormand, cutting him short.
It was like an order given by a sportsman to his dog. And Gourel ferreted after the manner of a good dog, a lively and intelligent animal, working under his master's eyes.
M. Lenormand pointed his stick to a corner, to an easy chair, just as one points to a bush or a tuft of grass, and Gourel beat up the bush or the tuft of grass with conscientious thoroughness.
"Nothing," said the sergeant, when he finished.
"Nothing for you!"
grunted M. Lenormand.
"That's what I meant to say...
I know that, for you, chief, there are things that talk like human beings, real living witnesses.
For all that, here is a murder well and duly added to our score against Master Lupin."
"The first," observed M. Lenormand.
"The first, yes...
But it was bound to come.
You can't lead that sort of life without, sooner or later, being driven by circumstances to serious crime.
Mr. Kesselbach must have defended himself..."
"No, because he was bound."
"That's true," owned Gourel, somewhat disconcertedly, "and it's rather curious too... Why kill an adversary who has practically ceased to exist?
...
But, no matter, if I had collared him yesterday, when we were face to face at the hall-door ..."
M. Lenormand had stepped out on the balcony.
Then he went to Mr. Kesselbach's bedroom, on the right, and tried the fastenings of the windows and doors.
"The windows of both rooms were shut when I came in," said Gourel.
"Shut, or just pushed to?"
"No one has touched them since.
And they are shut, chief."
A sound of voices brought them back to the sitting-room.
Here they found the divisional surgeon, engaged in examining the body, and M. Formerie, the magistrate.
M. Formerie exclaimed:
"Ars&#232;ne Lupin!
I am glad that at last a lucky chance has brought me into touch with that scoundrel again!
I'll show the fellow the stuff I'm made of!
... And this time it's a murder!
...
It's a fight between you and me now, Master Lupin!"
M. Formerie had not forgotten the strange adventure of the Princesse de Lamballe's diadem, nor the wonderful way in which Lupin had tricked him a few years before. The thing had remained famous in the annals of the law-courts.
People still laughed at it; and in M. Formerie it had left a just feeling of resentment, combined with the longing for a striking revenge.
See Ars&#232;ne Lupin.
By Edgar Jepson and Maurice Leblanc.
(Doubleday, Page &amp; Co.).
"The nature of the crime is self-evident," he declared, with a great air of conviction, "and we shall have no difficulty in discovering the motive.
So all is well... M. Lenormand, how do you do?
...
I am delighted to see you..."
M. Formerie was not in the least delighted.
On the contrary, M. Lenormand's presence did not please him at all, seeing that the chief detective hardly took the trouble to disguise the contempt in which he held him.
However, the magistrate drew himself up and, in his most solemn tones:
"So, doctor, you consider that death took place about a dozen hours ago, perhaps more!
... That, in fact, was my own idea... We are quite agreed... And the instrument of the crime?"
"A knife with a very thin blade, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction," replied the surgeon.
"Look, the blade has been wiped on the dead man's own handkerchief..."
"Just so ... just so ... you can see the mark... And now let us go and question Mr. Kesselbach's secretary and man-servant.
I have no doubt that their examination will throw some more light on the case."
Chapman, who together with Edwards, had been moved to his own room, on the left of the sitting-room, had already recovered from his experiences.
He described in detail the events of the previous day, Mr. Kesselbach's restlessness, the expected visit of the Colonel and, lastly, the attack of which they had been the victims.
"Aha!"
cried M. Formerie.
"So there's an accomplice!
And you heard his name!
... Marco, you say?
...
This is very important.
When we've got the accomplice, we shall be a good deal further advanced..."
"Yes, but we've not got him," M. Lenormand ventured to remark.
"We shall see... One thing at a time... And then, Mr. Chapman, this Marco went away immediately after M. Gourel had rung the bell?"
"Yes, we heard him go."
"And after he went, did you hear nothing else?"
"Yes ... from time to time, but vaguely...
The door was shut."
"And what sort of noises did you hear?"
"Bursts of voices.
The man ..."
"Call him by his name, Ars&#232;ne Lupin."
"Ars&#232;ne Lupin must have telephoned."
"Capital!
We will examine the person of the hotel who has charge of the branch exchange communicating with the outside.
And, afterward, did you hear him go out, too?"
"He came in to see if we were still bound; and, a quarter of an hour later, he went away, closing the hall-door after him."
"Yes, as soon as his crime was committed.
Good... Good...
It all fits in... And, after that?"
"After that, we heard nothing more...
The night passed...
I fell asleep from exhaustion...
So did Edwards... And it was not until this morning ..."
"Yes, I know...
There, it's not going badly ... it all fits in..."
And, marking off the stages of his investigation, in a tone as though he were enumerating so many victories over the stranger, he muttered thoughtfully:
"The accomplice ... the telephone ... the time of the murder ... the sounds that were heard... Good... Very good... We have still to establish the motive of the crime... In this case, as we have Lupin to deal with, the motive is obvious.
M. Lenormand, have you noticed the least sign of anything being broken open?"
"No."
"Then the robbery must have been effected upon the person of the victim himself.
Has his pocket-book been found?"
"I left it in the pocket of his jacket," said Gourel.
They all went into the sitting-room, where M. Formerie discovered that the pocket-book contained nothing but visiting-cards and papers establishing the murdered man's identity.
"That's odd.
Mr. Chapman, can you tell us if Mr. Kesselbach had any money on him?"
"Yes.
On the previous day &#8212; that is, on Monday, the day before yesterday &#8212; we went to the Cr&#233;dit Lyonnais, where Mr. Kesselbach hired a safe ..."
"A safe at the Cr&#233;dit Lyonnais?
Good... We must look into that."
"And, before we left, Mr. Kesselbach opened an account and drew out five or six thousand francs in bank-notes."
"Excellent ... that tells us just what we want to know."
Chapman continued:
"There is another point, Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction. Mr. Kesselbach, who for some days had been very uneasy in his mind &#8212; I have told you the reason: a scheme to which he attached the utmost importance &#8212; Mr. Kesselbach seemed particularly anxious about two things.
There was, first, a little ebony box, which he put away safely at the Cr&#233;dit Lyonnais; and, next, a little black morocco note-case, in which he kept a few papers."
"And where is that?"
"Before Lupin's arrival, he put it, in my presence, into that travelling-bag."
M. Formerie took the bag and felt about in it.
The note-case was not there.
He rubbed his hands:
"Ah, everything fits in!
... We know the culprit, the conditions and the motive of the crime.
This case won't take long.
Are we quite agreed upon everything, M.
Lenormand?"
"Upon not one single thing."
There was a moment of stupefaction.
The commissary of police had arrived: and, behind him, in spite of the constables keeping the door, a troop of journalists, and the hotel staff had forced their way in and were standing in the entrance-lobby.
Notorious though the old fellow was for his bluntness &#8212; a bluntness which was not without a certain discourtesy and which had already procured him an occasional reprimand in high quarters &#8212; the abruptness of this reply took every one aback.
And M. Formerie in particular appeared utterly nonplussed:
"Still," he said, "I can see nothing that isn't quite simple.
Lupin is the thief..."
"Why did he commit the murder?"
M. Lenormand flung at him.
"In order to commit the theft."
"I beg your pardon; the witnesses' story proves that the theft took place before the murder. Mr. Kesselbach was first bound and gagged, then robbed.
Why should Lupin, who has never resorted to murder, choose this time to kill a man whom he had rendered helpless and whom he had already robbed?"
The examining-magistrate stroked his long, fair whiskers, with the gesture customary to him when a question seemed incapable of solution.
He replied in a thoughtful tone:
"There are several answers to that..."
"What are they?"
"It depends ... it depends upon a number of facts as yet unknown... And, moreover, the objection applies only to the nature of the motives.
We are agreed as to the remainder."
"No."
This time, again, the denial was flat, blunt, almost impolite; so much so that the magistrate was absolutely nonplussed, dared not even raise a protest, and remained abashed in the presence of this strange collaborator.
At last he said:
"We all have our theories.
I should like to know yours."
"I have none."
The chief detective rose and, leaning on his stick, took a few steps through the room.
All the people around him were silent... And it was rather curious, in a group in which, after all, his position was only that of an auxiliary, a subordinate, to see this ailing, decrepit, elderly man dominate the others by the sheer force of an authority which they had to feel, even though they did not accept it.
After a long pause he said:
"I should like to inspect the rooms which adjoin this suite."
The manager showed him the plan of the hotel.
The only way out of the right-hand bedroom, which was Mr. Kesselbach's, was through the little entrance-hall of the suite.
But the bedroom on the left, the room occupied by the secretary, communicated with another apartment.
"Let us inspect it," said M. Lenormand.
M. Formerie could not help shrugging his shoulders and growling:
"But the communicating door is bolted and the window locked."
"Let us inspect it," repeated M. Lenormand.
He was taken into the apartment, which was the first of the five rooms reserved for Mrs. Kesselbach.
Then, at his request, he was taken to the rooms leading out of it.
All the communicating doors were bolted on both sides.
"Are not any of these rooms occupied?"
he asked.
"No."
"Where are the keys?"
"The keys are always kept in the office."
"Then no one can have got in?
..."
"No one, except the floor-waiter who airs and dusts the rooms."
"Send for him, please."
The man, whose name was Gustave Beudot, replied that he had closed the windows of five rooms on the previous day in accordance with his general instructions.
"At what time?"
"At six o'clock in the evening."
"And you noticed nothing?"
"No, sir."
"And, this morning ...
?"
"This morning, I opened the windows at eight o'clock exactly."
"And you found nothing?"
He hesitated.
He was pressed with questions and ended by admitting:
"Well, I picked up a cigarette-case near the fireplace in 420...
I intended to take it to the office this evening."
"Have you it on you?"
"No, it is in my room.
It is a gun-metal case.
It has a space for tobacco and cigarette-papers on one side and for matches on the other.
There are two initials in gold: an L and an M..."
"What's that?"
Chapman had stepped forward.
He seemed greatly surprised and, questioning the servant:
"A gun-metal cigarette-case, you say?"
"Yes."
"With three compartments &#8212; for tobacco, cigarette-papers, and matches... Russian tobacco, wasn't it, very fine and light?"
"Yes."
"Go and fetch it...
I should like to see it for myself ... to make sure..."
At a sign from the chief detective, Gustave Beudot left the room.
M. Lenormand sat down and his keen eyes examined the carpet, the furniture and the curtains.
He asked:
"This is room 420, is it not?"
"Yes."
The magistrate grinned:
"I should very much like to know what connection you establish between this incident and the tragedy.
Five locked doors separate us from the room in which Mr. Kesselbach was murdered."
M. Lenormand did not condescend to reply.
Time passed.
Gustave did not return.
"Where does he sleep?"
asked the chief detective.
"On the sixth floor," answered the manager.
"The room is on the Rue de Judée side: above this, therefore.
It's curious that he's not back yet."
"Would you have the kindness to send some one to see?"
The manager went himself, accompanied by Chapman.
A few minutes after, he returned alone, running, with every mark of consternation on his face.
"Well?"
"Dead!"
"Murdered?"
"Yes."
"Oh, by thunder, how clever these scoundrels are!"
roared M. Lenormand, "Off with you, Gourel, and have the doors of the hotel locked... Watch every outlet... And you, Mr.
Manager, please take us to Gustave Beudot's room."
The manager led the way.
But as they left the room, M. Lenormand stooped and picked up a tiny little round piece of paper, on which his eyes had already fixed themselves.
It was a label surrounded with a blue border and marked with the number 813.
He put it in his pocket, on chance, and joined the others...
A small wound in the back, between the shoulder-blades...
"Exactly the same wound as Mr. Kesselbach's," declared the doctor.
"Yes," said M. Lenormand, "it was the same hand that struck the blow and the same weapon was used."
Judging by the position of the body, the man had been surprised when on his knees before the bed, feeling under the mattress for the cigarette-case which he had hidden there.
His arm was still caught between the mattress and the bed, but the cigarette-case was not to be found.
"That cigarette-case must have been devilish compromising!"
timidly suggested M. Formerie, who no longer dared put forward any definite opinion.
"Well, of course!"
said the chief detective.
"At any rate, we know the initials: an L and an M. And with that, together with what Mr. Chapman appears to know, we shall easily learn..."
M. Lenormand gave a start:
"Chapman!
But where is he?"
They looked in the passage among the groups of people crowded together.
Chapman was not there.
"Mr. Chapman came with me," said the manager.
"Yes, yes, I know, but he did not come back with you."
"No, I left him with the corpse."
"You left him!
...
Alone?"
"I said to him, 'Stay here ... don't move.'"
"And was there no one about?
Did you see no one?"
"In the passage?
No."
"But in the other attics?
... Or else, look here, round that corner: was there no one hiding there?"
M. Lenormand seemed greatly excited. He walked up and down, he opened the doors of the rooms. And, suddenly, he set off at a run, with an agility of which no one would have thought him capable.
He rattled down the six storeys, followed at a distance by the manager and the examining-magistrate.
At the bottom, he found Gourel in front of the main door.
"Has no one gone out?"
"No, chief."
"What about the other door, in the Rue Orvieto?"
"I have posted Dieuzy there."
"With firm orders?"
"Yes, chief."
The huge hall of the hotel was crowded with anxious visitors, all commenting on the more or less accurate versions that had reached them of the crime. All the servants had been summoned by telephone and were arriving, one by one. M. Lenormand questioned them without delay.
None of them was able to supply the least information.
But a fifth-floor chambermaid appeared.
Ten minutes earlier, or thereabouts, she had passed two gentlemen who were coming down the servants' staircase between the fifth and the fourth floors.
"They came down very fast.
The one in front was holding the other by the hand.
I was surprised to see those two gentlemen on the servants' staircase."
"Would you know them again?"
"Not the first one.
He had his head turned the other way.
He was a thin, fair man.
He wore a soft black hat ... and black clothes."
"And the other?"
"Oh, the other was an Englishman, with a big, clean-shaven face and a check suit.
He had no hat on."
The description obviously referred to Chapman.
The woman added:
"He looked ... he looked quite funny ... as if he was mad."
Gourel's word was not enough for M. Lenormand.
One after the other, he questioned the under-porters standing at the two doors:
"Did you know Mr.
Chapman?"
"Yes, sir, he always spoke to us."
"And you have not seen him go out?"
"No, sir.
He has not been out this morning."
M. Lenormand turned to the commissary of police: "How many men have you with you, Monsieur le Commissaire?"
"Four."
"That's not sufficient.
Telephone to your secretary to send you all the men available.
And please be so good as yourself to organize the closest watch at every outlet.
The state of siege, Monsieur le Commissaire..."
"But I say," protested the manager, "my customers?"
"I don't care a hang, sir, for your customers!
My duty comes before everything; and my duty is at all costs to arrest..."
"So you believe ..." the examining-magistrate ventured to interpolate.
"I don't believe, monsieur ...
I am sure that the perpetrator of both the murders is still in the hotel."
"But then Chapman ..."
"At this moment, I cannot guarantee that Chapman is still alive. In any case, it is only a question of minutes, of seconds... Gourel, take two men and search all the rooms on the fourth floor... Mr.
Manager, send one of your clerks with them... As for the other floors, I shall proceed as soon as we are reënforced.
Come, Gourel, off with you, and keep your eyes open... It's big game you're hunting!"
Gourel and his men hurried away. M. Lenormand himself remained in the hall, near the office. This time, he did not think of sitting down, as his custom was.
He walked from the main entrance to the door in the Rue Orvieto and returned to the point from which he had started.
At intervals he gave instructions:
"Mr. Manager, see that the kitchens are watched. They may try to escape that way... Mr. Manager, instruct your young lady at the telephone not to put any of the people in the hotel into communication with outside subscribers.
If a call comes from the outside, she can connect the caller with the person asked for, but she must take a note of that person's name... Mr. Manager, have a list made out of all your visitors whose name begins with an L or an M."
The tension caught the spectators by the throat, as they stood clustered in the middle of the hall, silent and gasping for breath, shaking with fear at the least sound, obsessed by the infernal image of the murderer. Where was he hiding? Would he show himself?
Was he not one of themselves: this one, perhaps ... or that one? ...
And all eyes were turned on the gray-haired gentleman in spectacles, an olive-green frock-coat and a maroon-colored neckerchief, who was walking about, with his bent back, on a pair of shaky legs.
At times, one of the waiters accompanying Sergeant Gourel on his search would come running up.
"Any news?"
asked M. Lenormand.
"No, sir, we've found nothing."
The manager made two attempts to induce him to relax his orders regarding the doors.
The situation was becoming intolerable.
The office was filled with loudly-protesting visitors, who had business outside, or who had arranged to leave Paris.
"I don't care a hang!"
said M. Lenormand again.
"But I know them all."
"I congratulate you."
"You are exceeding your powers."
"I know."
"The law will decide against you."
"I'm convinced of that."
"Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction himself..."
"M. Formerie had better not interfere.
He can mind his own business, which is to examine the servants, as he is doing now.
Besides, it has nothing to do with the examining-magistrate, it has to do with the police.
It's my affair."
Just then a squad of police burst into the hotel.
The chief detective divided them into several sections which he sent up to the third floor.
Then, addressing the commissary of police:
"My dear commissary, I leave the task of watching the doors to you.
No weakness, I entreat you.
I will take the responsibility for anything that happens."
And, turning to the lift, he had himself conveyed to the second floor.
It was a difficult business and a long one, for they had to open the doors of the sixty bedrooms, to inspect all the bathrooms, all the recesses, all the cupboards, every nook and corner.
And it was also fruitless.
An hour later, on the stroke of twelve, M. Lenormand had just done the second floor; the other parties had not yet finished the upper floors; and no discovery had been made.
M. Lenormand hesitated: had the murderer retreated to the attics?
He was deciding, however, to go downstairs, when he was told that Mrs. Kesselbach had just arrived with her lady-companion.
Edwards, the old confidential man-servant, had accepted the task of informing her of Mr. Kesselbach's death.
M. Lenormand found her in one of the drawing rooms, overcome by the unexpected shock, dry-eyed, but with her features wrung with grief and her body trembling all over, as though convulsed with fever.
She was a rather tall, dark woman; and her black and exceedingly beautiful eyes were filled with gold, with little gold spots, like spangles gleaming in the dark.
Her husband had met her in Holland, where Dolores was born of an old family of Spanish origin, the Amontis.
He fell in love with her at first sight; and for four years the harmony between them, built up of mutual affection and devotion, had never been interrupted.
M. Lenormand introduced himself.
She looked at him without replying; and he was silent, for she did not appear, in her stupor, to understand what he said.
Then, suddenly, she began to shed copious tears and asked to be taken to her husband.
In the hall, M. Lenormand found Gourel, who was looking for him and who rushed at him with a hat which he held in his hand:
"I picked this up, chief...
There's no doubt whom it belongs to, is there?"
It was a soft, black felt hat and resembled the description given.
There was no lining or label inside it.
"Where did you pick it up?"
"On the second-floor landing of the servants' staircase."
"Nothing on the other floors?"
"Nothing.
We've searched everywhere.
There is only the first floor left.
And this hat shows that the man went down so far.
We're burning, chief!"
"I think so."
At the foot of the stairs M. Lenormand stopped:
"Go back to the commissary and give him my orders: he must post two men at the foot of each of the four staircases, revolver in hand. And they are to fire, if necessary.
Understand this, Gourel: if Chapman is not saved and if the fellow escapes, it means my resignation.
I've been wool-gathering for over two hours."
He went up the stairs.
On the first floor he met two policemen leaving a bedroom, accompanied by a servant of the hotel.
The passage was deserted.
The hotel staff dared not venture into it.
Some of the permanent visitors had locked themselves in their rooms; and the police had to knock for a long time and proclaim who they were before they could get the doors opened.
Farther on, M. Lenormand saw another group of policemen searching the maid's pantry and, at the end of a long passage, he saw some more men who were approaching the turning, that is to say, that part of the passage which contained the rooms overlooking the Rue de Jud&#233;e.
And, suddenly, he heard these men shouting; and they disappeared at a run.
He hurried after them.
The policemen had stopped in the middle of the passage.
At their feet, blocking their way, with its face on the carpet, lay a corpse.
M. Lenormand bent down and took the lifeless head in his hands:
"Chapman," he muttered.
"He is dead."
He examined the body.
A white knitted silk muffler was tied round the neck.
He undid it.
Red stains appeared; and he saw that the muffler held a thick wad of cotton-wool in position against the nape of the neck.
The wad was soaked with blood.
Once again there was the same little wound, clean, frank and pitiless.
M. Formerie and the commissary were at once told and came hastening up.
"No one gone out?"
asked the chief detective.
"No surprise?"
"No," said the commissary.
"There are two men on guard at the foot of each staircase."
"Perhaps he has gone up again?"
said M. Formerie.
"No!
... No!
..."
"But some one must have met him..."
"No...
This all happened quite a long time ago.
The hands are cold...
The murder must have been committed almost immediately after the other ... as soon as the two men came here by the servants' staircase."
"But the body would have been seen!
Think, fifty people must have passed this spot during the last two hours..."
"The body was not here."
"Then where was it?"
"Why, how can I tell?"
snapped the chief detective.
"Do as I'm doing, look for yourself!
You can't find things by talking."
He furiously patted the knob of his stick with a twitching hand; and he stood there, with his eyes fixed on the body, silent and thoughtful.
At last he spoke:
"Monsieur le Commissaire, be so good as to have the victim taken to an empty room.
Let them fetch the doctor.
Mr.
Manager, would you mind opening the doors of all the rooms on this passage for me?"
On the left were three bedrooms and two sitting-rooms, forming an empty suite, which M. Lenormand inspected. On the right were four bedrooms. Two were occupied respectively by a M. Reverdat and an Italian, Baron Giacomini, who were both then out.
In the third room they found an elderly English maiden lady still in bed; and, in the fourth, an Englishman who was placidly reading and smoking and who had not been in the least disturbed by the noises in the passage.
His name was Major Parbury.
No amount of searching or questioning led to any result.
The old maid had heard nothing before the exclamations of the policeman: no noise of a struggle, no cry of pain, no sound of quarreling; and Major Parbury neither.
Moreover, there was no suspicious clue found, no trace of blood, nothing to lead them to suppose that the unfortunate Chapman had been in one of those rooms.
"It's queer," muttered the examining-magistrate, "it's all very queer..." And he confessed, ingenuously, "I feel more and more at sea...
There is a whole series of circumstances that are partly beyond me.
What do you make of it, M.
Lenormand?"
M. Lenormand was on the point of letting off one of those pointed rejoinders in which he was wont to give vent to his chronic ill-temper, when Gourel appeared upon the scene, all out of breath.
"Chief," he panted, "they've found this ... downstairs ... in the office ... on a chair..."
It was a parcel of moderate dimensions, wrapped up in a piece of black serge.
"Did they open it?"
asked the chief.
"Yes, but when they saw what the parcel contained, they did it up again exactly as it was ... fastened very tight, as you can see..."
"Untie it."
Gourel removed the wrapper and disclosed a black diagonal jacket and trousers, which had evidently been packed up in a hurry, as the creases in the cloth showed.
In the middle was a towel, covered with blood, which had been dipped in water, in order, no doubt, to destroy the marks of the hands that had been wiped on it.
Inside the napkin was a steel dagger, with a handle encrusted with gold.
This also was red with blood, the blood of three men stabbed within the space of a few hours by an invisible hand, amid the crowd of three hundred people moving about in the huge hotel.
Edwards, the man-servant, at once identified the dagger as belonging to Mr. Kesselbach.
He had seen it on the table on the previous day, before the assault committed by Lupin.
"Mr.
Manager," said the chief detective, "the restriction is over.
Gourel, go and give orders to leave the doors free."
"So you think that Lupin has succeeded in getting out?"
asked M. Formerie.
"No.
The perpetrator of the three murders which we have discovered is in one of the rooms of the hotel, or, rather, he is among the visitors in the hall or in the reception-rooms.
In my opinion, he was staying in the hotel."
"Impossible!
Besides, where would he have changed his clothes?
And what clothes would he have on now?"
"I don't know, but I am stating a fact."
"And you are letting him go?
Why, he'll just walk out quietly, with his hands in his pockets!"
"The one who walks away like that, without his luggage, and who does not return, will be the criminal.
Mr.
Manager, please come with me to the office.
I should like to make a close inspection of your visitors' book."
In the office, M. Lenormand found a few letters addressed to Mr. Kesselbach. He handed them to the examining-magistrate. There was also a parcel that had just come by the Paris parcel-post.
The paper in which it was packed was partly torn; and M. Lenormand saw that it held a small ebony box, engraved with the name of Rudolf Kesselbach.
Feeling curious, he opened the parcel.
The box contained the fragments of a looking-glass which had evidently been fixed to the inside of the lid.
It also contained the card of Ars&#232;ne Lupin.
But one detail seemed to strike the chief detective.
On the outside, at the bottom of the box, was a little blue-edged label, similar to the label which he had picked up in the room on the fourth floor where the cigarette-case was found, and this label bore the same number, 813.
"Auguste, show M. Lenormand in."
The messenger went out and, a few seconds later, announced the chief of the detective-service.
There were three men in the prime minister's private room on the Place Beauvau: the famous Valenglay, leader of the radical party for the past thirty years and now president of the council and minister of the interior; the attorney-general, M. Testard; and the prefect of police, Delaume.
The prefect of police and the attorney-general did not rise from the chairs which they had occupied during their long conversation with the prime minister.
Valenglay, however, stood up and, pressing the chief detective's hand, said, in the most cordial tones:
"I have no doubt, my dear Lenormand, that you know the reason why I asked you to come."
"The Kesselbach case?"
"Yes."
The Kesselbach case! Not one of us but is able to recall not only the main details of this tragic affair, the tangled skein of which I have set myself to unravel, but even its very smallest incidents, so greatly did the tragedy excite us all during these recent years.
Nor is there one of us but remembers the extraordinary stir which it created both in and outside France.
And yet there was one thing that upset the public even more than the three murders committed in such mysterious circumstances, more than the detestable atrocity of that butchery, more than anything else; and that was the reappearance &#8212; one might almost say the resurrection &#8212; of Ars&#232;ne Lupin.
Ars&#232;ne Lupin!
No one had heard speak of him for over four years, since his incredible, his astounding adventure of the Hollow Needle, since the day when he had slunk away into the darkness before the eyes of Holmlock Shears and Isidore Beautrelet, carrying on his back the dead body of the woman whom he loved, and followed by his old servant, Victoire.
See The Hollow Needle.
By Maurice Leblanc.
Translated by Alexander Teixeira de Mattos and published by Doubleday, Page &amp; Co.
From that day onward he had been generally believed to be dead.
This was the version put about by the police, who, finding no trace of their adversary, were content purely and simply to bury him.
Some, however, believing him to be saved, described him as leading a placid, Philistine existence.
According to them, he was living with his wife and children, growing his small potatoes; whereas others maintained that, bent down with the weight of sorrow and weary of the vanities of this world, he had sought the seclusion of a Trappist monastery.
And here he was once more looming large in the public view and resuming his relentless struggle against society! Ars&#232;ne Lupin was Ars&#232;ne Lupin again, the fanciful, intangible, disconcerting, audacious, genial Ars&#232;ne Lupin! But, this time, a cry of horror arose. Ars&#232;ne Lupin had taken human life!
And the fierceness, the cruelty, the ruthless cynicism of the crime were so great that, then and there, the legend of the popular hero, of the chivalrous and occasionally sentimental adventurer, made way for a new conception of an inhuman, bloodthirsty, and ferocious monster.
The crowd now loathed and feared its former idol with more intensity than it had once shown in admiring him for his easy grace and his diverting good-humor.
And, forthwith, the indignation of that frightened crowd turned against the police. Formerly, people had laughed. They forgave the beaten commissary of police for the comical fashion in which he allowed himself to be beaten.
But the joke had lasted too long; and, in a burst of revolt and fury, they now called the authorities to account for the unspeakable crimes which these were powerless to prevent.
In the press, at public meetings, in the streets and even in the tribune of the Chamber of Deputies there was such an explosion of wrath that the government grew alarmed and strove by every possible means to allay the public excitement.
It so happened that Valenglay, the premier, took a great interest in all these police questions and had often amused himself by going closely into different cases with the chief of the detective-service, whose good qualities and independent character he valued highly.
He sent for the prefect and the attorney-general to see him in his room, talked to them and then sent for M. Lenormand.
"Yes, my dear Lenormand, it's about the Kesselbach case.
But, before we discuss it, I must call your attention to a point which more particularly affects and, I may say, annoys Monsieur le Pr&#233;fet de Police.
M. Delaume, will you explain to M. Lenormand ... ?
"Oh, M. Lenormand knows quite well how the matter stands," said the prefect, in a tone which showed but little good-will toward his subordinate.
"We have talked it over already and I have told him what I thought of his improper conduct at the Palace Hotel.
People are generally indignant."
M. Lenormand rose, took a paper from his pocket and laid it on the table.
"What is this?"
asked Valenglay.
"My resignation, Monsieur le Pr&#233;sident du Conseil."
Valenglay gave a jump:
"What! Your resignation! For a well-meaning remark which Monsieur le Pr&#233;fet thinks fit to address to you and to which, for that matter, he attaches no importance whatever &#8212; do you, Delaume? No importance whatever &#8212; and there you go, taking offence!
You must confess, my dear Lenormand, that you're devilish touchy!
Come, put that bit of paper back in your pocket and let's talk seriously."
The chief detective sat down again, and Valenglay, silencing the prefect, who made no attempt to conceal his dissatisfaction, said:
"In two words, Lenormand, the thing is that Lupin's reappearance upon the scene annoys us. The brute has defied us long enough. It used to be funny, I confess, and I, for my part, was the first to laugh at it. But it's no longer a question of that.
It's a question of murder now.
We could stand Lupin, as long as he amused the gallery.
But, when he takes to killing people, no!"
"Then what is it that you ask, Monsieur le Pr&#233;sident?"
"What we ask?
Oh, it's quite simple!
First, his arrest and then his head!"
"I can promise you his arrest, some day or another, but not his head."
"What!
If he's arrested, it means trial for murder, a verdict of guilty, and the scaffold."
"No!"
"And why not?"
"Because Lupin has not committed murder."
"Eh?
Why, you're mad, Lenormand!
The corpses at the Palace Hotel are so many inventions, I suppose!
And the three murders were never committed!"
"Yes, but not by Lupin."
The chief spoke these words very steadily, with impressive calmness and conviction.
The attorney and the prefect protested.
"I presume, Lenormand," said Valenglay, "that you do not put forward that theory without serious reasons?"
"It is not a theory."
"What proof have you?"
"There are two, to begin with, two proofs of a moral nature, which I at once placed before Monsieur le Juge d'Instruction and which the newspapers have laid stress upon. First and foremost, Lupin does not kill people.
Next, why should he have killed anybody, seeing that the object which he set out to achieve, the theft, was accomplished and that he had nothing to fear from an adversary who was gagged and bound?"
"Very well.
But the facts?"
"Facts are worth nothing against reason and logic; and, moreover, the facts also are on my side. What would be the meaning of Lupin's presence in the room in which the cigarette-case was discovered?
On the other hand, the black clothes which were found and which evidently belonged to the murderer are not in the least of a size to fit Lupin."
"You know him, then, do you?"
"I?
No.
But Edwards saw him, Gourel saw him; and the man whom they saw is not the man whom the chambermaid saw, on the servants' staircase, dragging Chapman by the hand."
"Then your idea ..."
"You mean to say, the truth, M. le Pr&#233;sident.
Here it is, or, at least, here is the truth as far as I know it.
On Tuesday, the 16th of April, a man &#8212; -Lupin &#8212; broke into Mr. Kesselbach's room at about two o'clock in the afternoon..."
M. Lenormand was interrupted by a burst of laughter.
It came from the prefect of police.
"Let me tell you, M. Lenormand, that you are in rather too great a hurry to state your precise facts. It has been shown that, at three o'clock on that day, Mr. Kesselbach walked into the Cr&#233;dit Lyonnais and went down to the safe deposit.
His signature in the register proves it."
M. Lenormand waited respectfully until his superior had finished speaking.
Then, without even troubling to reply directly to the attack, he continued:
"At about two o'clock in the afternoon, Lupin, assisted by an accomplice, a man named Marco, bound Mr. Kesselbach hand and foot, robbed him of all the loose cash which he had upon him and compelled him to reveal the cypher of his safe at the Cr&#233;dit Lyonnais.
As soon as the secret was told, Marco left.
He joined another accomplice, who, profiting by a certain resemblance to Mr. Kesselbach &#8212; a resemblance which he accentuated that day by wearing clothes similar to Mr. Kesselbach's and putting on a pair of gold spectacles &#8212; entered the Cr&#233;dit Lyonnais, imitated Mr. Kesselbach's signature, emptied the safe of its contents and walked off, accompanied by Marco.
Marco at once telephoned to Lupin.
Lupin, as soon as he was sure that Mr. Kesselbach had not deceived him and that the object of his expedition was attained, went away."
Valenglay seemed to waver in his mind:
"Yes, yes ... we'll admit that...
But what surprises me is that a man like Lupin should have risked so much for such a paltry profit: a few bank-notes and the hypothetical contents of a safe."
"Lupin was after more than that. He wanted either the morocco envelope which was in the traveling-bag, or else the ebony box which was in the safe. He had the ebony box, because he has sent it back empty.
Therefore, by this time, he knows, or is in a fair way for knowing, the famous scheme which Mr. Kesselbach was planning, and which he was discussing with his secretary a few minutes before his death."
"What was the scheme?"
"I don't exactly know. The manager of Barbareux's agency, to whom he had opened his mind about it, has told me that Mr. Kesselbach was looking for a man who went by the name of Pierre Leduc, a man who had lost caste, it appears.
Why and how the discovery of this person was connected with the success of his scheme, I am unable to say."
"Very well," said Valenglay.
"So much for Ars&#232;ne Lupin.
His part is played.
Mr. Kesselbach is bound hand and foot, robbed, but alive!
... What happens up to the time when he is found dead?"
"Nothing, for several hours, nothing until night.
But, during the night, some one made his way in."
"How?"
"Through room 420, one of the rooms reserved by Mr. Kesselbach.
The person in question evidently possessed a false key."
"But," exclaimed the prefect of police, "all the doors between that room and Mr. Kesselbach's flat were bolted; and there were five of them!"
"There was always the balcony."
"The balcony!"
"Yes; the balcony runs along the whole floor, on the Rue de Jud&#233;e side."
"And what about the spaces in between?"
"An active man can step across them.
Our man did.
I have found marks."
"But all the windows of the suite were shut; and it was ascertained, after the crime, that they were still shut."
"All except one, the secretary's window, Chapman's, which was only pushed to.
I tried it myself."
This time the prime minister seemed a little shaken, so logical did M. Lenormand's version seem, so precise and supported by such sound facts.
He asked, with growing interest:
"But what was the man's object in coming?"
"I don't know."
"Ah, you don't know!"
"Any more than I know his name."
"But why did he kill Mr.
Kesselbach?"
"I don't know. This all remains a mystery.
The utmost that we have the right to suppose is that he did not come with the intention of killing, but with the intention, he too, of taking the documents contained in the morocco note-case and the ebony box; and that, finding himself by accident in the presence of the enemy reduced to a state of helplessness, he killed him."
Valenglay muttered:
"Yes, strictly speaking, that is possible... And, according to you, did he find the documents?"
"He did not find the box, because it was not there; but he found the black morocco note-case.
So that Lupin and ... the other are in the same position.
Each knows as much as the other about the Kesselbach scheme."
"That means," remarked the premier, "that they will fight."
"Exactly.
And the fight has already begun.
The murderer, finding a card of Arsène Lupin's, pinned it to the corpse.
All the appearances would thus be against Arsène Lupin ... therefore, Arsène Lupin would be the murderer."
"True ... true," said Valenglay.
"The calculation seemed pretty accurate."
"And the stratagem would have succeeded," continued M. Lenormand, "if in consequence of another and a less favorable accident, the murderer had not, either in coming or going, dropped his cigarette-case in room 420, and if the floor-waiter, Gustave Beudot, had not picked it up.
From that moment, knowing himself to be discovered, or on the point of being discovered ..."
"How did he know it?"
"How? Why, through M. Formerie, the examining-magistrate, himself! The investigation took place with open doors.
It is certain that the murderer was concealed among the people, members of the hotel staff and journalists, who were present when Gustave Beudot was giving his evidence; and when the magistrate sent Gustave Beudot to his attic to fetch the cigarette-case, the man followed and struck the blow.
Second victim!"
No one protested now.
The tragedy was being reconstructed before their eyes with a realism and a probable accuracy which were equally striking.
"And the third victim?"
asked Valenglay.
"He himself gave the ruffian his opportunity.
When Beudot did not return, Chapman, curious to see the cigarette-case for himself, went upstairs with the manager of the hotel.
He was surprised by the murderer, dragged away by him, taken to one of the bedrooms and murdered in his turn."
"But why did he allow himself to be dragged away like that and to be led by a man whom he knew to be the murderer of Mr. Kesselbach and of Gustave Beudot?"
"I don't know, any more than I know the room in which the crime was committed, or the really miraculous way in which the criminal escaped."
"Something has been said about two blue labels."
"Yes, one was found on the box which Lupin sent back; and the other was found by me and doubtless came from the morocco note-case stolen by the murderer."
"Well?"
"I don't think that they mean anything.
What does mean something is the number 813, which Mr. Kesselbach wrote on each of them.
His handwriting has been recognized."
"And that number 813?"
"It's a mystery."
"Then?"
"I can only reply again that I don't know."
"Have you no suspicions?"
"None at all.
Two of my men are occupying one of the rooms in the Palace Hotel, on the floor where Chapman's body was found.
I have had all the people in the hotel watched by these two men.
The criminal is not one of those who have left."
"Did no one telephone while the murders were being committed?"
"Yes, some one telephoned from the outside to Major Parbury, one of the four persons who occupied rooms on the first-floor passage."
"And this Major Parbury?"
"I am having him watched by my men.
So far, nothing has been discovered against him."
"And in which direction do you intend to seek?"
"Oh, in a very limited direction.
In my opinion, the murderer must be numbered among the friends or connections of Mr. and Mrs. Kesselbach.
He followed their scent, knew their habits, the reason of Mr. Kesselbach's presence in Paris; and he at least suspected the importance of Mr. Kesselbach's plans."
"Then he was not a professional criminal?"
"No, no, certainly not! The murder was committed with extraordinary cleverness and daring, but it was due to circumstances. I repeat, we shall have to look among the people forming the immediate circle of Mr. and Mrs. Kesselbach.
And the proof is that Mr. Kesselbach's murderer killed Gustave Beudot for the sole reason that the waiter had the cigarette-case in his possession; and Chapman for the sole reason that the secretary knew of its existence.
Remember Chapman's excitement: at the mere description of the cigarette-case, Chapman received a sudden insight into the tragedy.
If he had seen the cigarette-case, we should have been fully informed.
The man, whoever he may be, was well aware of that: and he put an end to Chapman.
And we know nothing, nothing but the initials L and M."
He reflected for a moment and said:
"There is another proof, which forms an answer to one of your questions, Monsieur le Président: Do you believe that Chapman would have accompanied that man along the passages and staircases of the hotel if he did not already know him?"
The facts were accumulating. The truth or, at least, the probable truth was gaining strength. Many of the points at issue, the most interesting, perhaps, remained obscure. But what a light had been thrown upon the subject!
Short of the motives that inspired them, how clearly Lenormand's hearers now perceived the sequence of acts performed on that tragic morning!
There was a pause.
Every one was thinking, seeking for arguments, for objections.
At last, Valenglay exclaimed:
"My dear Lenormand, this is all quite excellent.
You have convinced me...
But, taking one thing with another, we are no further than we were."
"What do you mean?"
"What I say. The object of our meeting is not to clear up a portion of the mystery, which, one day, I am sure, you will clear up altogether, but to satisfy the public demand as fully as we possibly can.
Now whether the murderer is Lupin or another; whether there are two criminals, or three, or only one: all this gives us neither the criminal's name nor his arrest.
And the public continues under the disastrous impression that the law is powerless."
"What can I do?"
"Give the public the definite satisfaction which it demands."
"But it seems to me that this explanation ought to be enough..."
"Words!
The public wants deeds!
One thing alone will satisfy it: an arrest."
"Hang it all!
Hang it all!
We can't arrest the first person that comes along!"
"Even that would be better than arresting nobody," said Valenglay, with a laugh.
"Come, have a good look round!
Are you sure of Edwards, Kesselbach's servant?"
"Absolutely sure.
Besides ... No, Monsieur le Président, it would be dangerous and ridiculous; and I am sure that Mr. Attorney-General himself ...
There are only two people whom we have the right to arrest: the murderer - I don't know who he is - and Arsène Lupin."
"Well?"
"There is no question of arresting Arsène Lupin, or, at least, it requires time, a whole series of measures, which I have not yet had the leisure to contrive, because I looked upon Lupin as settled down ... or dead."
Valenglay stamped his foot with the impatience of a man who likes to see his wishes realized on the spot:
"And yet ... and yet, my dear Lenormand, something must be done ... if only for your own sake. You know as well as I do that you have powerful enemies ... and that, if I were not there ...
In short, Lenormand, you can't be allowed to get out of it like this.
What are you doing about the accomplices?
There are others besides Lupin.
There is Marco; and there's the rogue who impersonated Mr. Kesselbach in order to visit the cellars of the Crédit Lyonnais."
"Would you be satisfied if you got him, Monsieur le Président?"
"Would I be satisfied?
Heavens alive, I should think I would!"
"Well, give me seven days."
"Seven days!
Why, it's not a question of days, my dear Lenormand!
It's a question of hours!"
"How many will you give me, Monsieur le Président?"
Valenglay took out his watch and chuckled:
"I will give you ten minutes, my dear Lenormand!"
The chief took out his, and emphasizing each syllable, said calmly:
"That is four minutes more than I want, Monsieur le Président."
Valenglay looked at him in amazement.
"Four minutes more than you want?
What do you mean by that?"
"I mean, Monsieur le Président, that the ten minutes which you allow me are superfluous.
I want six, and not one minute more."
"Oh, but look here, Lenormand ... if you imagine that this is the time for joking ..."
The chief detective went to the window and beckoned to two men who were walking round the courtyard.
Then he returned:
"Mr. Attorney-General, would you have the kindness to sign a warrant for the arrest of Auguste Maximin Philippe Daileron, aged forty-seven?
You might leave the profession open."
He went to the door:
"Come in, Gourel.
You, too, Dieuzy."
Gourel entered, accompanied by Inspector Dieuzy.
"Have you the handcuffs, Gourel?"
"Yes, chief."
M. Lenormand went up to Valenglay:
"Monsieur le Président, everything is ready.
But I entreat you most urgently to forego this arrest.
It upsets all my plans; it may render them abortive; and, for the sake of what, after all, is a very trifling satisfaction, it exposes us to the risk of jeopardizing the whole business."
"M. Lenormand, let me remark that you have only eighty seconds left."
The chief suppressed a gesture of annoyance, strode across the room and, leaning on his stick, sat down angrily, as though he had decided not to speak.
Then, suddenly making up his mind:
"Monsieur le Président, the first person who enters this room will be the man whose arrest you asked for ... against my wish, as I insist on pointing out to you."
"Fifteen seconds, Lenormand!"
"Gourel ... Dieuzy ... the first person, do you understand?
... Mr. Attorney, have you signed the warrant?"
"Ten seconds, Lenormand!"
"Monsieur le Président, would you be so good as to ring the bell?"
Valenglay rang.
The messenger appeared in the doorway and waited.
Valenglay turned to the chief:
"Well, Lenormand, he's waiting for your orders.
Whom is he to show in?"
"No one."
"But the rogue whose arrest you promised us?
The six minutes are more than past."
"Yes, but the rogue is here!"
"Here?
I don't understand.
No one has entered the room!"
"I beg your pardon."
"Oh, I say... Look here, Lenormand, you're making fun of us.
I tell you again that no one has entered the room."
"There were six of us in this room, Monsieur le Président; there are seven now.
Consequently, some one has entered the room."
Valenglay started:
"Eh!
But this is madness!
... What!
You mean to say ..."
The two detectives had slipped between the messenger and the door.
M. Lenormand walked up to the messenger, clapped his hand on his shoulder and, in a loud voice:
"In the name of the law, Auguste Maximin Philippe Daileron, chief messenger at the Ministry of the Interior, I arrest you."
Valenglay burst out laughing.
"Oh, what a joke!
What a joke!
That infernal Lenormand!
Of all the first-rate notions!
Well done, Lenormand!
It's long since I enjoyed so good a laugh."
M. Lenormand turned to the attorney-general:
"Mr. Attorney, you won't forget to fill in Master Daileron's profession on the warrant, will you?
Chief messenger at the Ministry of the Interior."
"Oh, good! ... Oh, capital! ... Chief messenger at the Ministry of the Interior!" spluttered Valenglay, holding his sides. "Oh, this wonderful Lenormand gets hold of ideas that would never occur to anybody else!
The public is clamoring for an arrest... Whoosh, he flings at its head my chief messenger ... Auguste ... the model servant!
Well, Lenormand, my dear fellow, I knew you had a certain gift of imagination, but I never suspected that it would go so far as this!
The impertinence of it!"
From the commencement of this scene, Auguste had not stirred a limb and seemed to understand nothing of what was going on around him. His face, the typical face of a good, loyal, faithful serving-man, seemed absolutely bewildered.
He looked at the gentlemen turn and turn about, with a visible effort to catch the meaning of their words.
M. Lenormand said a few words to Gourel, who went out.
Then, going up to Auguste and speaking with great decision, he said:
"There's no way out of it.
You're caught.
The best thing to do, when the game is lost, is to throw down your cards.
What were you doing on Tuesday?"
"I?
Nothing.
I was here."
"You lie.
You were off duty.
You went out for the day."
"Oh, yes ...
I remember ...
I had a friend to see me from the country... We went for a walk in the Bois."
"Your friend's name was Marco.
And you went for a walk in the cellars of the Crédit Lyonnais."
"I?
What an idea!
... Marco!
...
I don't know any one by that name."
"And these?
Do you know these?"
cried the chief, thrusting a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles under his nose.
"No ... certainly not...
I don't wear spectacles..."
"Yes, you do; you wear them when you go to the Crédit Lyonnais and when you pass yourself off as Mr. Kesselbach.
These come from your room, the room which you occupy, under the name of M. Jérôme, at No.
50 Rue du Colisee."
"My room?
My room?
I sleep here, at the office."
"But you change your clothes over there, to play your parts in Lupin's gang."
A blow in the chest made him stagger back.
Auguste reached the window at a bound, climbed over the balcony and jumped into the courtyard.
"Dash it all!"
shouted Valenglay.
"The scoundrel!"
He rang the bell, ran to the window, wanted to call out.
M. Lenormand, with the greatest calm, said:
"Don't excite yourself, Monsieur le Président ..."
"But that blackguard of an Auguste ..."
"One second, please...
I foresaw this ending ... in fact, I allowed for it...
It's the best confession we could have..."
Yielding in the presence of this coolness, Valenglay resumed his seat.
In a moment, Gourel entered, with his hand on the collar of Master Auguste Maximin Philippe Daileron, alias Jérôme, chief messenger at the Ministry of the Interior.
"Bring him, Gourel!"
said M. Lenormand, as who should say, "Fetch it!
Bring it!"
to a good retriever carrying the game in its jaws.
"Did he come quietly?"
"He bit me a little, but I held tight," replied the sergeant, showing his huge, sinewy hand.
"Very well, Gourel.
And now take this chap off to the Dépôt in a cab.
Good-bye for the present, M.
Jérôme."
Valenglay was immensely amused.
He rubbed his hands and laughed.
The idea that his chief messenger was one of Lupin's accomplices struck him as a most delightfully ludicrous thing.
"Well done, my dear Lenormand; this is wonderful!
But how on earth did you manage it?"
"Oh, in the simplest possible fashion. I knew that Mr. Kesselbach was employing the Barbareux agency and that Lupin had called on him, pretending to come from the agency.
I hunted in that direction and discovered that, when the indiscretion was committed to the prejudice of Mr. Kesselbach and of Barbareux, it could only have been to the advantage of one Jérôme, a friend of one of the clerks at the agency.
If you had not ordered me to hustle things, I should have watched the messenger and caught Marco and then Lupin."
"You'll catch them, Lenormand, you'll catch them, I assure you.
And we shall be assisting at the most exciting spectacle in the world: the struggle between Lupin and yourself.
I shall bet on you."
The next morning the newspapers published the following letter:
"Open Letter to M. Lenormand, Chief of the Detective-service.
"All my congratulations, dear sir and dear friend, on your arrest of Jérôme the messenger.
It was a smart piece of work, well executed and worthy of you.
"All my compliments, also, on the ingenious manner in which you proved to the prime minister that I was not Mr. Kesselbach's murderer. Your demonstration was clear, logical, irrefutable and, what is more, truthful. As you know, I do not kill people. Thank you for proving it on this occasion.
The esteem of my contemporaries and of yourself, dear sir and dear friend, are indispensable to my happiness.
"In return, allow me to assist you in the pursuit of the monstrous assassin and to give you a hand with the Kesselbach case, a very interesting case, believe me: so interesting and so worthy of my attention that I have determined to issue from the retirement in which I have been living for the past four years, between my books and my good dog Sherlock, to beat all my comrades to arms and to throw myself once more into the fray.
"What unexpected turns life sometimes takes!
Here am I, your fellow-worker!
Let me assure you, dear sir and dear friend, that I congratulate myself upon it, and that I appreciate this favor of destiny at its true value.
"Arsène Lupin.
"P.S. - One word more, of which I feel sure that you will approve.
As it is not right and proper that a gentleman who has had the glorious privilege of fighting under my banner should languish on the straw of your prisons, I feel it my duty to give you fair warning that, in five weeks' time, on Friday, the 31st of May, I shall set at liberty Master Jérôme, promoted by me to the rank of chief messenger at the Ministry of the Interior.
Don't forget the date: Friday, the 31st of May.
"A. L."
A ground-floor flat, at the corner of the Boulevard Haussmann and the Rue de Courcelles.
Here lived Prince Sernine: Prince Sernine, one of the most brilliant members of the Russian colony in Paris, whose name was constantly recurring in the "Arrivals and Departures" column in the newspapers.
Eleven o'clock in the morning. The prince entered his study. He was a man of thirty-eight or forty years of age, whose chestnut hair was mingled with a few silver threads on the temples.
He had a fresh, healthy complexion and wore a large mustache and a pair of whiskers cut extremely short, so as to be hardly noticeable against the fresh skin of his cheeks.
He was smartly dressed in a tight-fitting frock-coat and a white drill waistcoat, which showed above the opening.
"Come on!"
he said, in an undertone.
"I have a hard day's work before me, I expect."
He opened a door leading into a large room where a few people sat waiting, and said:
"Is Varnier there?
Come in, Varnier."
A man looking like a small tradesman, squat, solidly built, firmly set upon his legs, entered at the summons.
The prince closed the door behind him:
"Well, Varnier, how far are you?"
"Everything's ready for this evening, governor."
"Good.
Tell me in a few words."
"It's like this. After her husband's murder, Mrs. Kesselbach, on the strength of the prospectuses which you ordered to be sent to her, selected as her residence the establishment known as the Retreat for Gentlewomen, at Garches.
She occupies the last of the four small houses, at the bottom of the garden, which the management lets to ladies who prefer to live quite apart from the other boarders, the house known as the Pavillon de l'Impératrice."
"What servants has she?"
"Her companion, Gertrude, with whom she arrived a few hours after the crime, and Gertrude's sister Suzanne, whom she sent for to Monte Carlo and who acts as her maid.
The two sisters are devoted to her."
"What about Edwards, the valet?"
"She did not keep him.
He has gone back to his own country."
"Does she see people?"
"No.
She spends her time lying on a sofa.
She seems very weak and ill. She cries a great deal.
Yesterday the examining-magistrate was with her for two hours."
"Very good.
And now about the young girl."
"Mlle.
Geneviève Ernemont lives across the way ... in a lane running toward the open country, the third house on the right in the lane.
She keeps a free school for backward children.
Her grandmother, Mme.
Ernemont, lives with her."
"And, according to what you wrote to me, Geneviève Ernemont and Mrs. Kesselbach have become acquainted?"
"Yes.
The girl went to ask Mrs. Kesselbach for a subscription for her school.
They must have taken a liking to each other, for, during the past four days, they have been walking together in the Parc de Villeneuve, of which the garden of the Retreat is only a dependency."
"At what time do they go out?"
"From five to six.
At six o'clock exactly the young lady goes back to her school."
"So you have arranged the thing?"
"For six o'clock to-day.
Everything is ready."
"Will there be no one there?"
"There is never any one in the park at that hour."
"Very well.
I shall be there.
You can go."
He sent him out through the door leading to the hall, and, returning to the waiting-room, called:
"The brothers Doudeville."
Two young men entered, a little overdressed, keen-eyed and pleasant-looking.
"Good morning, Jean.
Good morning, Jacques.
Any news at the Prefecture?"
"Nothing much, governor."
"Does M. Lenormand continue to have confidence in you?"
"Yes. Next to Gourel, we are his favorite inspectors. A proof is that he has posted us in the Palace Hotel to watch the people who were living on the first-floor passage at the time of Chapman's murder.
Gourel comes every morning, and we make the same report to him that we do to you."
"Capital. It is essential that I should be informed of all that happens and all that is said at the Prefecture of Police. As long as Lenormand looks upon you as his men, I am master of the situation.
And have you discovered a trail of any kind in the hotel?"
Jean Doudeville, the elder of the two, replied:
"The Englishwoman who occupied one of the bedrooms has gone."
"That doesn't interest me.
I know all about her.
But her neighbor, Major Parbury?"
They seemed embarrassed.
At last, one of them replied:
"Major Parbury, this morning, ordered his luggage to be taken to the Gare du Nord, for the twelve-fifty train, and himself drove away in a motor.
We were there when the train left.
The major did not come."
"And the luggage?"
"He had it fetched at the station."
"By whom?"
"By a commissionaire, so we were told."
"Then his tracks are lost?"
"Yes."
"At last!"
cried the prince, joyfully.
The others looked at him in surprise.
"Why, of course," he said, "that's a clue!"
"Do you think so?"
"Evidently. The murder of Chapman can only have been committed in one of the rooms on that passage. Mr. Kesselbach's murderer took the secretary there, to an accomplice, killed him there, changed his clothes there; and, once the murderer had got away, the accomplice placed the corpse in the passage.
But which accomplice?
The manner of Major Parbury's disappearance goes to show that he knows something of the business.
Quick, telephone the good news to M. Lenormand or Gourel.
The Prefecture must be informed as soon as possible.
The people there and I are marching hand in hand."
He gave them a few more injunctions, concerning their double r&#244;le as police-inspectors in the service of Prince Sernine, and dismissed them.
Two visitors remained in the waiting-room.
He called one of them in:
"A thousand pardons, Doctor," he said.
"I am quite at your orders now.
How is Pierre Leduc?"
"He's dead."
"Aha!"
said Sernine.
"I expected it, after your note of this morning.
But, all the same, the poor beggar has not been long..."
"He was wasted to a shadow.
A fainting-fit; and it was all over."
"Did he not speak?"
"No."
"Are you sure that, from the day when the two of us picked him up under the table in that low haunt at Belleville, are you sure that nobody in your nursing-home suspected that he was the Pierre Leduc whom the police were looking for, the mysterious Pierre Leduc whom Mr. Kesselbach was trying to find at all costs?"
"Nobody.
He had a room to himself.
Moreover, I bandaged up his left hand so that the injury to the little finger could not be seen.
As for the scar on the cheek, it is hidden by the beard."
"And you looked after him yourself?"
"Myself.
And, according to your instructions, I took the opportunity of questioning him whenever he seemed at all clear in his head.
But I could never get more than an inarticulate stammering out of him."
The prince muttered thoughtfully:
"Dead! ... So Pierre Leduc is dead? ... The whole Kesselbach case obviously turned on him, and now he disappears ... without a revelation, without a word about himself, about his past... Ought I to embark on this adventure, in which I am still entirely in the dark? It's dangerous...
I may come to grief..."
He reflected for a moment and exclaimed:
"Oh, who cares? I shall go on for all that. It's no reason, because Pierre Leduc is dead, that I should throw up the game. On the contrary! And the opportunity is too tempting! Pierre Leduc is dead! Long live Pierre Leduc! ... Go, Doctor, go home.
I shall ring you up before dinner."
The doctor went out.
"Now then, Philippe," said Sernine to his last remaining visitor, a little gray-haired man, dressed like a waiter at a hotel, a very tenth-rate hotel, however.
"You will remember, governor," Philippe began, "that last week, you made me go as boots to the H&#244;tel des Deux-Empereurs at Versailles, to keep my eye on a young man."
"Yes, I know... G&#233;rard Baupr&#233;.
How do things stand with him?"
"He's at the end of his resources."
"Still full of gloomy ideas?"
"Yes.
He wants to kill himself."
"Is he serious?"
"Quite.
I found this little note in pencil among his papers."
"Ah!"
said Sernine, reading the note.
"He announces his suicide ... and for this evening too!"
"Yes, governor, he has bought the rope and screwed the hook to the ceiling. Thereupon, acting on your instructions, I talked to him.
He told me of his distress, and I advised him to apply to you: 'Prince Sernine is rich,' I said; 'he is generous; perhaps he will help you.'"
"All this is first-rate.
So he is coming?"
"He is here."
"How do you know?"
"I followed him.
He took the train to Paris, and he is walking up and down the boulevard at this minute.
He will make up his mind from one moment to the other."
Just then the servant brought in a card.
The prince glanced at it and said to the man:
"Show M. G&#233;rard Baupr&#233; in."
Then, turning to Philippe:
"You go into the dressing-room, here; listen and don't stir."
Left alone, the prince muttered:
"Why should I hesitate?
It's fate that sends him my way..."
A few minutes later a tall young man entered.
He was fair and slender, with an emaciated face and feverish eyes, and he stood on the threshold embarrassed, hesitating, in the attitude of a beggar who would like to put out his hand for alms and dares not.
The conversation was brief:
"Are you M. G&#233;rard Baupr&#233;?"
"Yes ... yes ... that is my name."
"I have not the honor ..."
"It's like this, sir...
Some one told me ..."
"Who?"
"A hotel servant ... who said he had been in your service..."
"Please come to the point..."
"Well!
..."
The young man stopped, taken aback and frightened by the haughty attitude adopted by the prince, who exclaimed:
"But, sir, there must be some ..."
"Well, sir, the man told me that you were very rich ... and very generous... And I thought that you might possibly ..."
He broke off short, incapable of uttering the word of prayer and humiliation.
Sernine went up to him.
"M. G&#233;rard Baupr&#233;, did you not publish a volume of poetry called The Smile of Spring?"
"Yes, yes," cried the young man, his face lighting up.
"Have you read it?"
"Yes...
Very pretty, your poems, very pretty... Only, do you reckon upon being able to live on what they will bring you?"
"Certainly ... sooner or later..."
"Sooner or later?
Later rather than sooner, I expect!
And, meantime, you have come to ask me for the wherewithal to live?"
"For the wherewithal to buy food, sir."
Sernine put his hand on the young man's shoulder and, coldly:
"Poets do not need food, monsieur.
They live on rhymes and dreams.
Do as they do.
That is better than begging for bread."
The young man quivered under the insult.
He turned to the door without a word.
Sernine stopped him:
"One thing more, monsieur.
Have you no resources of any kind?"
"None at all."
"And you are not reckoning on anything?"
"I have one hope left: I have written to one of my relations, imploring him to send me something.
I shall have his answer to-day.
It is my last chance."
"And, if you have no answer, you have doubtless made up your mind, this very evening, to ..."
"Yes, sir."
This was said quite plainly and simply.
Sernine burst out laughing:
"Bless my soul, what a queer young man you are!
And full of artless conviction, too!
Come and see me again next year, will you?
We will talk about all this ... it's so curious, so interesting ... and, above all, so funny!
... Ha, ha, ha, ha!"
And, shaking with laughter, with affected bows and gestures, he showed him the door.
"Philippe," he said, admitting the hotel-servant, "did you hear?"
"Yes, governor."
"G&#233;rard Baupr&#233; is expecting a telegram this afternoon, a promise of assistance..."
"Yes, it's his last hope."
"He must not receive that telegram.
If it comes, intercept it and tear it up."
"Very well, governor."
"Are you alone at your hotel?"
"Yes, with the cook, who does not sleep in.
The boss is away."
"Good.
So we are the masters.
Till this evening, at eleven.
Be off."
Prince Sernine went to his room and rang for his servant:
"My hat, gloves, and stick.
Is the car there?"
"Yes, sir."
He dressed, went out, and sank into a large, comfortable limousine, which took him to the Bois de Boulogne, to the Marquis and Marquise de Gastyne's, where he was engaged for lunch.
At half-past two he took leave of his hosts, stopped in the Avenue Kl&#233;ber, picked up two of his friends and a doctor, and at five minutes to three arrived at the Parc des Princes.
At three o'clock he fought a sword duel with the Italian Major Spinelli, cut his adversary's ear in the first bout, and, at a quarter to four, took a bank at the Rue Cambon Club, from which he retired, at twenty minutes past five, after winning forty-seven thousand francs.
And all this without hurrying, with a sort of haughty indifference, as though the feverish activity that sent his life whizzing through a whirl of tempestuous deeds and events were the ordinary rule of his most peaceful days.
"Octave," he said to his chauffeur, "go to Garches."
And at ten minutes to six he alighted outside the old walls of the Parc de Villeneuve.
Although broken up nowadays and spoilt, the Villeneuve estate still retains something of the splendor which it knew at the time when the Empress Eug&#233;nie used to stay there.
With its old trees, its lake and the leafy horizon of the woods of Saint-Cloud, the landscape has a certain melancholy grace.
An important part of the estate was made over to the Pasteur Institute.
A smaller portion, separated from the other by the whole extent of the space reserved for the public, forms a property contained within the walls which is still fairly large, and which comprises the House of Retreat, with four isolated garden-houses standing around it.
"That is where Mrs. Kesselbach lives," said the prince to himself, catching sight of the roofs of the house and the four garden-houses in the distance.
He crossed the park and walked toward the lake.
Suddenly he stopped behind a clump of trees.
He had seen two ladies against the parapet of the bridge that crossed the lake:
"Varnier and his men must be somewhere near.
But, by Jove, they are keeping jolly well hidden!
I can't see them anywhere..."
The two ladies were now strolling across the lawns, under the tall, venerable trees.
The blue of the sky appeared between the branches, which swayed in the peaceful breeze, and the scent of spring and of young vegetation was wafted through the air.
On the grassy slopes that ran down to the motionless water, daisies, violets, daffodils, lilies of the valley, all the little flowers of April and May stood grouped, and, here and there, formed constellations of every color.
The sun was sinking on the horizon.
And, all at once, three men started from a thicket of bushes and made for the two ladies.
They accosted them. A few words were exchanged. The ladies gave visible signs of dread. One of the men went up to the shorter of the two and tried to snatch the gold purse which she was carrying in her hand.
They cried out; and the three men flung themselves upon them.
"Now or never!"
said the prince.
And he rushed forward.
In ten seconds he had almost reached the brink of the water.
At his approach, the three men fled.
"Run away, you vagabonds," he chuckled; "run for all you are worth!
Here's the rescuer coming!"
And he set out in pursuit of them.
But one of the ladies entreated him:
"Oh, sir, I beg of you ... my friend is ill."
The shorter lady had fallen on the grass in a dead faint.
He retraced his steps and, anxiously:
"She is not wounded?"
he asked.
"Did those scoundrels ..."
"No ... no ... it's only the fright ... the excitement...
Besides you will understand ... the lady is Mrs. Kesselbach..."
"Oh!"
he said.
He produced a bottle of smelling-salts, which the younger woman at once applied to her friend's nostrils.
And he added:
"Lift the amethyst that serves as a stopper... You will see a little box containing some tabloids.
Give madame one of them ... one, no more ... they are very strong..."
He watched the young woman helping her friend.
She was fair-haired, very simply dressed; and her face was gentle and grave, with a smile that lit up her features even when she was not smiling.
"That is Genevi&#232;ve," he thought.
And he repeated with emotion, "Genevi&#232;ve ... Genevi&#232;ve..."
Meanwhile, Mrs. Kesselbach gradually recovered consciousness.
She was astonished at first, seemed not to understand.
Then, her memory returning, she thanked her deliverer with a movement of the head.
He made a deep bow and said:
"Allow me to introduce myself...
I am Prince Sernine..."
She said, in a faint voice:
"I do not know how to express my gratitude."
"By not expressing it at all, madame.
You must thank chance, the chance that turned my steps in this direction.
May I offer you my arm?"
A few minutes later, Mrs. Kesselbach rang at the door of the House of Retreat and said to the prince:
"I will ask one more service of you, monsieur.
Do not speak of this assault."
"And yet, madame, it would be the only way of finding out ..."
"Any attempt to find out would mean an inquiry; and that would involve more noise and fuss about me, examinations, fatigue; and I am worn out as it is."
The prince did not insist.
Bowing to her, he asked:
"Will you allow me to call and ask how you are?"
"Oh, certainly..."
She kissed Genevi&#232;ve and went indoors.
Meantime, night was beginning to fall.
Sernine would not let Genevi&#232;ve return alone.
But they had hardly entered the path, when a figure, standing out against the shadow, hastened toward them.
"Grandmother!"
cried Genevi&#232;ve.
She threw herself into the arms of an old woman, who covered her with kisses:
"Oh, my darling, my darling, what has happened?
How late you are!
... And you are always so punctual!"
Genevi&#232;ve introduced the prince:
"Prince Sernine ... Mme.
Ernemont, my grandmother..."
Then she related the incident, and Mme.
Ernemont repeated:
"Oh, my darling, how frightened you must have been!
...
I shall never forget your kindness, monsieur, I assure you...
But how frightened you must have been, my poor darling!"
"Come, granny, calm yourself, as I am here..."
"Yes, but the fright may have done you harm... One never knows the consequences... Oh, it's horrible!
..."
They went along a hedge, through which a yard planted with trees, a few shrubs, a playground and a white house were just visible.
Behind the house, sheltered by a clump of elder-trees arranged to form a covered walk, was a little gate.
The old lady asked Prince Sernine to come in and led the way to a little drawing-room or parlor.
Genevi&#232;ve asked leave to withdraw for a moment, to go and see her pupils, whose supper-time it was.
The prince and Mme.
Ernemont remained alone.
The old lady had a sad and a pale face, under her white hair, which ended in two long, loose curls.
She was too stout, her walk was heavy and, notwithstanding her appearance and her dress, which was that of a lady, she had something a little vulgar about her; but her eyes were immensely kind.
Prince Sernine went up to her, took her head in his two hands and kissed her on both cheeks:
"Well, old one, and how are you?"
She stood dumfounded, wild-eyed, open-mouthed.
The prince kissed her again, laughing.
She spluttered:
"You!
It's you!
O mother of God!
... O mother of God!
... Is it possible!
... O mother of God!
..."
"My dear old Victoire!"
"Don't call me that," she cried, shuddering.
"Victoire is dead ... your old servant no longer exists.
I belong entirely to Genevi&#232;ve."
And, lowering her voice, "O mother of God!
...
I saw your name in the papers: then it's true that you have taken to your wicked life again?"
See Ars&#232;ne Lupin, by Edgar Jepson and Maurice Leblanc, and The Hollow Needle, by Maurice Leblanc, translated by Alexander Teixeira de Mattos.
"As you see."
"And yet you swore to me that it was finished, that you were going away for good, that you wanted to become an honest man."
"I tried.
I have been trying for four years... You can't say that I have got myself talked about during those four years!"
"Well?"
"Well, it bores me."
She gave a sigh and asked:
"Always the same... You haven't changed... Oh, it's settled, you never will change...
So you are in the Kesselbach case?"
"Why, of course! But for that, would I have taken the trouble to arrange for an attack on Mrs. Kesselbach at six o'clock, so that I might have the opportunity of delivering her from the clutches of my own men at five minutes past?
Looking upon me as her rescuer, she is obliged to receive me.
I am now in the heart of the citadel and, while protecting the widow, can keep a lookout all round.
Ah, you see, the sort of life which I lead does not permit me to lounge about and waste my time on little questions of politeness and such outside matters.
I have to go straight to the point, violently, brutally, dramatically..."
She looked at him in dismay and gasped:
"I see ...
I see ... it's all lies about the attack...
But then ... Genevi&#232;ve ..."
"Why, I'm killing two birds with one stone! It was as easy to rescue two as one. Think of the time it would have taken, the efforts &#8212; useless efforts, perhaps &#8212; to worm myself into that child's friendship! What was I to her? What should I be now?
An unknown person ... a stranger.
Whereas now I am the rescuer.
In an hour I shall be ... the friend."
She began to tremble:
"So ... so you did not rescue Genevi&#232;ve... So you are going to mix us up in your affairs..." And, suddenly, in a fit of rebellion, seizing him by the shoulders, "No, I won't have it, do you understand?
You brought the child to me one day, saying, 'Here, I entrust her to you ... her father and mother are dead ... take her under your protection.'
Well, she's under my protection now and I shall know how to defend her against you and all your man&#339;uvers!"
Standing straight upright, in a very determined attitude, Mme.
Ernemont seemed ready for all emergencies.
Slowly and deliberately Sernine loosened the two hands, one after the other, that held him, and in his turn, took the old lady by the shoulders, forced her into an arm-chair, stooped over and, in a very calm voice, said:
"Rot!"
She began to cry and, clasping her hands together, implored him:
"I beseech you, leave us in peace. We were so happy! I thought that you had forgotten us and I blessed Heaven every time a day had passed. Why, yes ... I love you just the same.
But, Genevi&#232;ve ... you see, there's nothing that I wouldn't do for that child.
She has taken your place in my heart."
"So I perceive," said he, laughing.
"You would send me to the devil with pleasure.
Come, enough of this nonsense!
I have no time to waste.
I must talk to Genevi&#232;ve."
"You're going to talk to her?"
"Well, is that a crime?"
"And what have you to tell her?"
"A secret ... a very grave secret ... and a very touching one..."
The old lady took fright:
"And one that will cause her sorrow, perhaps?
Oh, I fear everything, I fear everything, where she's concerned!
..."
"She is coming," he said.
"No, not yet."
"Yes, yes, I hear her...
Wipe your eyes and be sensible."
"Listen," said she, eagerly, "listen. I don't know what you are going to say, what secret you mean to reveal to this child whom you don't know. But I, who do know her, tell you this: Genevi&#232;ve has a very plucky, very spirited, but very sensitive nature.
Be careful how you choose your words... You might wound feelings ... the existence of which you cannot even suspect..."
"Lord bless me!
And why not?"
"Because she belongs to another race than you, to a different world...
I mean, a different moral world...
There are things which you are forbidden to understand nowadays.
Between you and her, the obstacle is insurmountable... Genevi&#232;ve has the most unblemished and upright conscience ... and you ..."
"And I?"
"And you are not an honest man!"
Genevi&#232;ve entered, bright and charming:
"All my babies have gone to bed; I have ten minutes to spare... Why, grandmother, what's the matter?
You look quite upset... Is it still that business with the ..."
"No, mademoiselle," said Sernine, "I believe I have had the good fortune to reassure your grandmother.
Only, we were talking of you, of your childhood; and that is a subject, it seems, which your grandmother cannot touch upon without emotion."
"Of my childhood?"
said Genevi&#232;ve, reddening.
"Oh, grandmother!"
"Don't scold her, mademoiselle.
The conversation turned in that direction by accident.
It so happens that I have often passed through the little village where you were brought up."
"Aspremont?"
"Yes, Aspremont, near Nice.
You used to live in a new house, white all over..."
"Yes," she said, "white all over, with a touch of blue paint round the windows... I was only seven years old when I left Aspremont; but I remember the least things of that period.
And I have not forgotten the glare of the sun on the white front of the house, nor the shade of the eucalyptus-tree at the bottom of the garden."
"At the bottom of the garden, mademoiselle, was a field of olive-trees; and under one of those olive-trees stood a table at which your mother used to work on hot days..."
"That's true, that's true," she said, quite excitedly, "I used to play by her side..."
"And it was there," said he, "that I saw your mother several times...
I recognized her image the moment I set eyes on you ... but it was a brighter, happier image."
"Yes, my poor mother was not happy.
My father died on the very day of my birth, and nothing was ever able to console her.
She used to cry a great deal.
I still possess a little handkerchief with which I used to dry her tears at that time."
"A little handkerchief with a pink pattern."
"What!"
she exclaimed, seized with surprise.
"You know ..."
"I was there one day when you were comforting her... And you comforted her so prettily that the scene remained impressed on my memory."
She gave him a penetrating glance and murmured, almost to herself:
"Yes, yes...
I seem to ...
The expression of your eyes ... and then the sound of your voice..."
She lowered her eyelids for a moment and reflected as if she were vainly trying to bring back a recollection that escaped her.
And she continued:
"Then you knew her?"
"I had some friends living near Aspremont and used to meet her at their house.
The last time I saw her, she seemed to me sadder still ... paler ... and, when I came back again ..."
"It was all over, was it not?" said Geneviève.
"Yes, she went very quickly ... in a few weeks ... and I was left alone with neighbors who sat up with her ... and one morning they took her away... And, on the evening of that day, some one came, while I was asleep, and lifted me up and wrapped me in blankets..."
"A man?"
asked the prince.
"Yes, a man.
He talked to me, quite low, very gently ... his voice did me good ... and, as he carried me down the road and also in the carriage, during the night, he rocked me in his arms and told me stories ... in the same voice ... in the same voice ..."
She broke off gradually and looked at him again, more sharply than before and with a more obvious effort to seize the fleeting impression that passed over her at moments.
He asked:
"And then?
Where did he take you?"
"I can't recollect clearly ... it is just as though I had slept for several days...
I can remember nothing before the little town of Montégut, in the Vendée, where I spent the second half of my childhood, with Father and Mother Izereau, a worthy couple who reared me and brought me up and whose love and devotion I shall never forget."
"And did they die, too?"
"Yes," she said, "of an epidemic of typhoid fever in the district ... but I did not know that until later... As soon as they fell ill, I was carried off as on the first occasion and under the same conditions, at night, by some one who also wrapped me up in blankets... Only, I was bigger, I struggled, I tried to call out ... and he had to close my mouth with a silk handkerchief."
"How old were you then?"
"Fourteen ... it was four years ago."
"Then you were able to see what the man was like?"
"No, he hid his face better and he did not speak a single word to me...
Nevertheless, I have always believed him to be the same one ... for I remember the same solicitude, the same attentive, careful movements..."
"And after that?"
"After that, came oblivion, sleep, as before...
This time, I was ill, it appears; I was feverish... And I woke in a bright, cheerful room.
A white-haired lady was bending over me and smiling.
It was grandmother ... and the room was the one in which I now sleep upstairs."
She had resumed her happy face, her sweet, radiant expression; and she ended, with a smile:
"That was how she became my grandmother and how, after a few trials, the little Aspremont girl now knows the delights of a peaceful life and teaches grammar and arithmetic to little girls who are either naughty or lazy ... but who are all fond of her."
She spoke cheerfully, in a tone at once thoughtful and gay, and it was obvious that she possessed a reasonable, well-balanced mind.
Sernine listened to her with growing surprise and without trying to conceal his agitation:
"Have you never heard speak of that man since?"
he asked.
"Never."
"And would you be glad to see him again?"
"Oh, very glad."
"Well, then, mademoiselle ..."
Geneviève gave a start:
"You know something ... the truth perhaps ..."
"No ... no ... only ..."
He rose and walked up and down the room.
From time to time, his eyes fell upon Geneviève; and it looked as though he were on the point of giving a more precise answer to the question which she had put to him.
Would he speak?
Mme.
Ernemont awaited with anguish the revelation of the secret upon which the girl's future peace might depend.
He sat down beside Geneviève, appeared to hesitate, and said at last:
"No ... no ... just now ... an idea occurred to me ... a recollection ..."
"A recollection?
... And ..."
"I was mistaken.
Your story contained certain details that misled me."
"Are you sure?"
He hesitated and then declared:
"Absolutely sure."
"Oh," said she, greatly disappointed.
"I had half guessed ... that that man whom I saw twice ... that you knew him ... that ..."
She did not finish her sentence, but waited for an answer to the question which she had put to him without daring to state it completely.
He was silent.
Then, insisting no further, she bent over Mme.
Ernemont:
"Good night, grandmother.
My children must be in bed by this time, but they could none of them go to sleep before I had kissed them."
She held out her hand to the prince:
"Thank you once more..."
"Are you going?"
he asked quickly.
"Yes, if you will excuse me; grandmother will see you out."
He bowed low and kissed her hand.
As she opened the door, she turned round and smiled.
Then she disappeared.
The prince listened to the sound of her footsteps diminishing in the distance and stood stock-still, his face white with emotion.
"Well," said the old lady, "so you did not speak?"
"No..."
"That secret ..."
"Later... To-day ... oddly enough ...
I was not able to."
"Was it so difficult?
Did not she herself feel that you were the stranger who took her away twice... A word would have been enough..."
"Later, later," he repeated, recovering all his assurance. "You can understand ... the child hardly knows me... I must first gain the right to her affection, to her love...
When I have given her the life which she deserves, a wonderful life, such as one reads of in fairy-tales, then I will speak."
The old lady tossed her head:
"I fear that you are making a great mistake.
Geneviève does not want a wonderful life.
She has simple tastes."
"She has the tastes of all women; and wealth, luxury and power give joys which not one of them despises."
"Yes, Geneviève does.
And you would do much better ..."
"We shall see. For the moment, let me go my own way. And be quite easy. I have not the least intention, as you say, of mixing her up in any of my manœuvers.
She will hardly ever see me... Only, we had to come into contact, you know... That's done... Good-bye."
He left the school and walked to where his motor-car was waiting for him.
He was perfectly happy:
"She is charming ... and so gentle, so grave! Her mother's eyes, eyes that soften you ... Heavens, how long ago that all is! And what a delightful recollection! A little sad, but so delightful!" And he said, aloud, "Certainly I shall look after her happiness! And that at once!
This very evening!
That's it, this very evening she shall have a sweetheart!
Is not love the essential condition of any young girl's happiness?"
He found his car on the high-road:
"Home," he said to Octave.
When Sernine reached home, he rang up Neuilly and telephoned his instructions to the friend whom he called the doctor.
Then he dressed, dined at the Rue Cambon Club, spent an hour at the opera and got into his car again:
"Go to Neuilly, Octave.
We are going to fetch the doctor.
What's the time?"
"Half-past ten."
"Dash it!
Look sharp!"
Ten minutes later, the car stopped at the end of the Boulevard Inkerman, outside a villa standing in its own grounds.
The doctor came down at the sound of the hooter.
The prince asked:
"Is the fellow ready?"
"Packed up, strung up, sealed up."
"In good condition?"
"Excellent.
If everything goes as you telephoned, the police will be utterly at sea."
"That's what they're there for.
Let's get him on board."
They carried into the motor a sort of long sack shaped like a human being and apparently rather heavy.
And the prince said:
"Go to Versailles, Octave, Rue de la Vilaine.
Stop outside the Hôtel des Deux-Empereurs."
"Why, it's a filthy hotel," observed the doctor.
"I know it well; a regular hovel."
"You needn't tell me!
And it will be a hard piece of work, for me, at least...
But, by Jove, I wouldn't sell this moment for a fortune!
Who dares pretend that life is monotonous?"
They reached the Hôtel des Deux-Empereurs.
A muddy alley; two steps down; and they entered a passage lit by a flickering lamp.
Sernine knocked with his fist against a little door.
A waiter appeared, Philippe, the man to whom Sernine had given orders, that morning, concerning Gérard Baupré.
"Is he here still?"
asked the prince.
"Yes."
"The rope?"
"The knot is made."
"He has not received the telegram he was hoping for?"
"I intercepted it: here it is."
Sernine took the blue paper and read it:
"Gad!" he said. "It was high time. This is to promise him a thousand francs for to-morrow. Come, fortune is on my side. A quarter to twelve... In a quarter of an hour, the poor devil will take a leap into eternity. Show me the way, Philippe.
You stay here, Doctor."
The waiter took the candle.
They climbed to the third floor, and, walking on tip-toe, went along a low and evil-smelling corridor, lined with garrets and ending in a wooden staircase covered with the musty remnants of a carpet.
"Can no one hear me?"
asked Sernine.
"No.
The two rooms are quite detached.
But you must be careful not to make a mistake: he is in the room on the left."
"Very good.
Now go downstairs.
At twelve o'clock, the doctor, Octave and you are to carry the fellow up here, to where we now stand, and wait till I call you."
The wooden staircase had ten treads, which the prince climbed with definite caution.
At the top was a landing with two doors.
It took Sernine quite five minutes to open the one of the right without breaking the silence with the least sound of a creaking hinge.
A light gleamed through the darkness of the room.
Feeling his way, so as not to knock against one of the chairs, he made for that light.
It came from the next room and filtered through a glazed door covered with a tattered hanging.
The prince pulled the threadbare stuff aside.
The panes were of ground glass, but scratched in parts, so that, by applying one eye, it was easy to see all that happened in the other room.
Sernine saw a man seated at a table facing him.
It was the poet, Gérard Baupré.
He was writing by the light of a candle.
Above his head hung a rope, which was fastened to a hook fixed in the ceiling.
At the end of the rope was a slip-knot.
A faint stroke sounded from a clock in the street.
"Five minutes to twelve," thought Sernine.
"Five minutes more."
The young man was still writing.
After a moment, he put down his pen, collected the ten or twelve sheets of paper which he had covered and began to read them over.
What he read did not seem to please him, for an expression of discontent passed across his face.
He tore up his manuscript and burnt the pieces in the flame of the candle.
Then, with a fevered hand, he wrote a few words on a clean sheet, signed it savagely and rose from his chair.
But, seeing the rope at ten inches above his head, he sat down again suddenly with a great shudder of alarm.
Sernine distinctly saw his pale features, his lean cheeks, against which he pressed his clenched fists.
A tear trickled slowly down his face, a single, disconsolate tear.
His eyes gazed into space, eyes terrifying in their unutterable sadness, eyes that already seemed to behold the dread unknown.
And it was so young a face!
Cheeks still so smooth, with not a blemish, not a wrinkle!
And blue eyes, blue like an eastern sky!
...
Midnight ... the twelve tragic strokes of midnight, to which so many a despairing man has hitched the last second of his existence!
At the twelfth stroke, he stood up again and, bravely this time, without trembling, looked at the sinister rope.
He even tried to give a smile, a poor smile, the pitiful grimace of the doomed man whom death has already seized for its own.
Swiftly he climbed the chair and took the rope in one hand.
For a moment, he stood there, motionless: not that he was hesitating or lacking in courage.
But this was the supreme moment, the one minute of grace which a man allows himself before the fatal deed.
He gazed at the squalid room to which his evil destiny had brought him, the hideous paper on the walls, the wretched bed.
On the table, not a book: all were sold.
Not a photograph, not a letter: he had no father, no mother, no relations.
What was there to make him cling to life?
With a sudden movement he put his head into the slip-knot and pulled at the rope until the noose gripped his neck.
And, kicking the chair from him with both feet, he leapt into space.
Ten seconds, fifteen seconds passed, twenty formidable, eternal seconds...
The body gave two or three jerks.
The feet had instinctively felt for a resting-place.
Then nothing moved...
A few seconds more...
The little glazed door opened.
Sernine entered.
Without the least haste he took the sheet of paper to which the young man had set his signature, and read:
"Tired of living, ill, penniless, hopeless, I am taking my own life.
Let no one be accused of my death.
"Gérard Baupré.
"30 April."
He put back the paper on the table where it could be seen, picked up the chair and placed it under the young man's feet.
He himself climbed up on the table and, holding the body close to him, lifted it up, loosened the slip-knot and passed the head through it.
The body sank into his arms.
He let it slide along the table and, jumping to the floor, laid it on the bed.
Then, with the same coolness, he opened the door on the passage:
"Are you there, all the three of you?"
he whispered.
Some one answered from the foot of the wooden staircase near him:
"We are here.
Are we to hoist up our bundle?"
"Yes, come along!"
He took the candle and showed them a light.
The three men trudged up the stairs, carrying the sack in which the "fellow" was tied up.
"Put him here," he said, pointing to the table.
With a pocket-knife, he cut the cords round the sack.
A white sheet appeared, which he flung back.
In the sheet was a corpse, the corpse of Pierre Leduc.
"Poor Pierre Leduc!" said Sernine. "You will never know what you lost by dying so young! I should have helped you to go far, old chap. However, we must do without your services... Now then, Philippe, get up on the table; and you, Octave, on the chair.
Lift up his head and fasten the slip-knot."
Two minutes later, Pierre Leduc's body was swinging at the end of the rope.
"Capital, that was quite simple! Now you can all of you go. You, Doctor, will call back here to-morrow morning; you will hear of the suicide of a certain Gérard Baupré: you understand, Gérard Baupré. Here is his farewell letter.
You will send for the divisional surgeon and the commissary; you will arrange that neither of them notices that the deceased has a cut finger or a scar on one cheek..."
"That's easy."
"And you will manage so as to have the report written then and there, to your dictation."
"That's easy."
"Lastly, avoid having the body sent to the Morgue and make them give permission for an immediate burial."
"That's not so easy."
"Try.
Have you examined the other one?"
He pointed to the young man lying lifeless on the bed.
"Yes," said the doctor.
"The breathing is becoming normal.
But it was a big risk to run ... the carotid artery might have ..."
"Nothing venture, nothing have... How soon will he recover consciousness?"
"In a few minutes."
"Very well.
Oh, by the way, don't go yet, Doctor.
Wait for me downstairs.
There is more for you to do."
The prince, when he found himself alone, lit a cigarette and puffed at it quietly, sending little blue rings of smoke floating up to the ceiling.
A sigh roused him from his thoughts. He went to the bed. The young man was beginning to move; and his chest rose and fell violently, like that of a sleeper under the influence of a nightmare.
He put his hands to his throat, as though he felt a pain there; and this action suddenly made him sit up, terrified, panting...
Then he saw Sernine in front of him:
"You?"
he whispered, without understanding.
"You?
..."
He gazed at him stupidly, as though he had seen a ghost.
He again touched his throat, felt round his neck... And suddenly he gave a hoarse cry; a mad terror dilated his eyes, made his hair stand on end, shook him from head to foot like an aspen-leaf!
The prince had moved aside; and he saw the man's corpse hanging from the rope.
He flung himself back against the wall. That man, that hanged man, was himself! He was dead and he was looking at his own dead body! Was this a hideous dream that follows upon death?
A hallucination that comes to those who are no more and whose distracted brain still quivers with a last flickering gleam of life? ...
His arms struck at the air.
For a moment, he seemed to be defending himself against the squalid vision.
Then, exhausted, he fainted away for the second time.
"First-rate," said the prince, with a grin.
"A sensitive, impressionable nature... At present, the brain is out of gear... Come, this is a propitious moment...
But, if I don't get the business done in twenty minutes ... he'll escape me..."
He pushed open the door between the two garrets, came back to the bed, lifted the young man and carried him to the bed in the other room.
Then he bathed his temples with cold water and made him sniff at some salts.
This time, the swoon did not last long.
Gérard timidly opened his eyes and raised them to the ceiling. The vision was gone.
But the arrangement of the furniture, the position of the table and the fireplace, and certain other details all surprised him ... And then came the remembrance of his act, the pain which he felt at his throat...
He said to the prince:
"I have had a dream, have I not?"
"No."
"How do you mean, no?"
And, suddenly recollecting, "Oh, that's true, I remember...
I meant to kill myself ... and I even ..." Bending forward anxiously, "But the rest, the vision ..."
"What vision?"
"The man ... the rope ... was that a dream?
..."
"No," said Sernine.
"That also was real."
"What are you saying? What are you saying? ... Oh, no, no! ... I entreat you! ... Wake me, if I am asleep ... or else let me die! ... But I am dead, am I not? And this is the nightmare of a corpse!
... Oh, I feel my brain going! ...
I entreat you..."
Sernine placed his hand gently on the young man's head and, bending over him:
"Listen to me ... listen to me carefully and understand what I say. You are alive. Your matter and your mind are as they were and live. But Gérard Baupré is dead. You understand me, do you not?
That member of society who was known as Gérard Baupré has ceased to exist.
You have done away with that one.
To-morrow, the registrar will write in his books, opposite the name you bore, the word 'Dead,' with the date of your decease."
"It's a lie!"
stammered the terrified lad.
"It's a lie!
Considering that I, Gérard Baupré, am here!"
"You are not Gérard Baupré," declared Sernine. And, pointing to the open door, "Gérard Baupré is there, in the next room. Do you wish to see him? He is hanging from the nail to which you hooked him.
On the table is a letter in which you certify his death with your signature.
It is all quite regular, it is all final.
There is no getting away from the irrevocable, brutal fact: Gérard Baupré has ceased to exist!"
The young man listened in despair.
Growing calmer, now that facts were assuming a less tragic significance, he began to understand:
"And then ..." he muttered.
"And then ... let us talk."
"Yes, yes ... let us talk..."
"A cigarette?"
asked the prince.
"Will you have one?
Ah, I see that you are becoming reconciled to life!
So much the better: we shall understand each other; and that quickly."
He lit the young man's cigarette and his own and, at once, in a few words uttered in a hard voice, explained himself:
"You, the late Gérard Baupré, were weary of life, ill, penniless, hopeless... Would you like to be well, rich, and powerful?"
"I don't follow you."
"It is quite simple. Accident has placed you on my path. You are young, good-looking, a poet; you are intelligent and - your act of despair shows it - you have a fine sense of conduct. These are qualities which are rarely found united in one person.
I value them ... and I take them for my account."
"They are not for sale."
"Idiot!
Who talks of buying or selling?
Keep your conscience.
It is too precious a jewel for me to relieve you of it."
"Then what do you ask of me?"
"Your life!" And, pointing to the bruises on the young man's throat, "Your life, which you have not known how to employ!
Your life, which you have bungled, wasted, destroyed and which, I propose to build up again, in accordance with an ideal of beauty, greatness and dignity that would make you giddy, my lad, if you saw the abyss into which my secret thought plunges..." He had taken Gérard's head between his hands and he continued, eagerly: "You are free!
No shackles!
You have no longer the weight of your name to bear!
You have got rid of that number with which society had stamped you as though branding you on the shoulder.
You are free!
In this world of slaves where each man bears his label you can either come and go unknown, invisible, as if you owned Gyges' ring ... or else you can choose your own label, the one you like best!
Do you understand the magnificent treasure which you represent to an artist ... to yourself, if you like?
A virgin life, a brand-new life!
Your life is the wax which you have the right to fashion as you please, according to the whims of your imagination and the counsels of your reason."
The young man made a gesture expressive of weariness:
"Ah, what would you have me do with that treasure?
What have I done with it so far?
Nothing!"
"Give it to me."
"What can you do with it?"
"Everything.
If you are not an artist, I am; and an enthusiastic artist, inexhaustible, indomitable, exuberant.
If you have not the Promethean fire, I have!
Where you failed, I shall succeed.
Give me your life."
"Words, promises!"
cried the young man, whose features began to glow with animation.
"Empty dreams!
I know my own worthlessness!
I know my cowardice, my despondency, my efforts that come to nothing, all my wretchedness.
To begin life anew, I should need a will which I do not possess..."
"I possess mine."
"Friends..."
"You shall have them."
"Means..."
"I am providing you with means ... and such means!
You will only have to dip, as one would dip into a magic coffer."
"But who are you?"
cried the young man, wildly.
"To others, Prince Sernine... To you ... what does it matter?
I am more than a prince, more than a king, more than an emperor..."
"Who are you?
... Who are you?"
stammered Baupré.
"The Master ... he who will and who can ... he who acts... There are no bounds to my will, there is none to my power. I am richer than the richest man alive, for his fortune is mine...
I am more powerful than the mightiest, for their might is at my service!"
He took the other's head in his hands again and, looking deep into his eyes:
"Be rich, too ... be mighty...
I offer you happiness ... and the joy of living ... and peace for your poet's brain ... and fame and glory also... Do you accept?"
"Yes ... yes ..." whispered Gérard, dazzled and overmastered.
"What am I to do?"
"Nothing."
"But ..."
"Nothing, I say.
The whole scaffolding of my plans rests on you, but you do not count.
You have no active part to play.
You are, for the moment, but a silent actor, or not even that, but just a pawn which I move along the board."
"What shall I do?"
"Nothing.
Write poetry.
You shall live as you please.
You shall have money.
You shall enjoy life.
I will not even bother my head about you.
I repeat, you play no part in my venture."
"And who shall I be?"
Sernine stretched out his arm and pointed to the next room:
"You shall take that man's place.
You are that man!"
Gérard shuddered with revolt and disgust:
"Oh, no, he is dead!
... And then ... it is a crime!
... No, I want a new life, made for me, thought out for me ... an unknown name..."
"That man, I tell you!"
cried Sernine, irresistible in his energy and authority.
"You shall be that man and none other!
That man, because his destiny is magnificent, because his name is illustrious, and because he hands down to you a thrice-venerable heritage of ancestral dignity and pride."
"It is a crime!"
moaned Baupré, faltering.
"You shall be that man!"
spoke Sernine, with unparalleled vehemence.
"You shall be that man!
If not, you become Baupré again; and over Baupré I own rights of life and death.
Choose."
He drew his revolver, cocked it and took aim at the young man:
"Choose," he repeated.
The expression of his face was implacable.
Gérard was frightened and sank down on his bed sobbing:
"I wish to live!"
"You wish it firmly, irrevocably?"
"Yes, a thousand times yes!
After the terrible thing which I attempted, death appals me...
Anything ... anything rather than death!
...
Anything!
...
Pain ... hunger ... illness ... every torture, every shame ... crime itself, if need be ... but not death!"
He shivered with fever and agony, as though the great enemy were still prowling round him and as though he felt himself powerless to escape from its clutches.
The prince redoubled his efforts and, in a fervent voice, holding him under him like a prey:
"I will ask nothing impossible of you, nothing wrong...
If there is anything, I am responsible... No, no crime ... a little pain at most... A little of your blood must flow.
But what is that, compared with the dread of dying?"
"Pain is indifferent to me."
"Then here and now!"
shouted Sernine.
"Here and now!
Ten seconds of pain and that is all...
Ten seconds and the other's life is yours..."
He had seized him round the body and forced him down on a chair; and he now held the young man's left hand flat on the table, with his five fingers spread out.
He swiftly took a knife from his pocket, pressed the blade against the little finger, between the first and second joints, and commanded:
"Strike!
Strike your own blow.
One blow of the fist and that is all!"
He had taken Gérard's right hand and was trying to bring it down upon the other like a hammer.
Gérard writhed and twisted, convulsed with horror.
He understood:
"Never!"
he stuttered.
"Never!"
"Strike!
One blow and it's done!
One blow and you will be like that man: no one will recognize you."
"Tell me his name..."
"Strike first!"
"Never!
Oh, what torture!
...
I beseech you ... presently..."
"Now...
I insist ... you must ..."
"No ... no ...
I can't do it..."
"Strike, you fool!
It means fortune, fame, love..."
Gérard raised his fist with a sudden movement.
"Love," he said, "yes ... for that, yes..."
"You will love and be loved," said Sernine.
"Your betrothed awaits you.
I have chosen her myself.
She is the purest of the pure, the fairest of the fair.
But you must win her.
Strike!"
The lad's arm stiffened for the fatal blow; but the instinct of self-preservation was too strong for him.
His body was wrung with a superhuman effort.
He suddenly released himself from Sernine's hold and fled.
He rushed like a madman to the other room.
A yell of terror escaped him, at the sight of the abominable vision, and he came back and fell on his knees before Sernine, beside the table.
"Strike!"
said the prince, again spreading out the lad's fingers and fixing the blade of the knife.
What followed was done mechanically.
With an automatic movement, with haggard eyes and a livid face, the young man raised his fist and struck:
"Ah!"
he cried, with a moan of pain.
A small piece of flesh was separated from the little finger.
Blood flowed.
For the third time, Gérard fainted.
Sernine looked at him for a second or two and said, gently:
"Poor little chap!
...
There, I'll reward you for what you've done; and a hundred times over.
I always pay generously."
He went downstairs and found the doctor waiting below:
"It's done.
Go upstairs, you, and make a little cut in his right cheek, similar to Pierre Leduc's.
The two scars must be exactly alike.
I shall come back for you in an hour."
"Where are you going?"
"To take the air.
My heart feels anyhow."
Outside he drew a long breath and lit another cigarette:
"A good day's work," he muttered. "A little over-crowded, a little tiring, but fruitful, really fruitful. I am Dolores Kesselbach's friend. I am Geneviève's friend. I have manufactured a new Pierre Leduc, a very presentable one and entirely at my disposal.
Lastly, I have found Geneviève a husband of the sort that you don't find by the dozen.
Now my task is done.
I have only to gather the fruit of my efforts.
It's your turn to work, M. Lenormand.
I, for my part, am ready."
And he added, thinking of the poor mutilated lad whom he had dazzled with his promises, "Only - for there is an 'only' - I have not the slightest notion who this Pierre Leduc was, whose place I have magnanimously awarded to that good young man.
And that's very annoying... For when all is said, there's nothing to prove to me that Pierre Leduc was not the son of a pork-butcher! ..."
On the morning of the 31st of May, all the newspapers reminded their readers that Lupin, in a letter addressed to M. Lenormand, had announced the escape of the messenger J&#233;r&#244;me for that date.
And one of them summed up the situation, as it then stood, in very able terms:
"The horrible carnage at the Palace Hotel took place as far back as the 17th of April.
What has been discovered since?
Nothing.
"There were three clues: the cigarette-case, the initials L and M and the parcel of clothes left behind in the office of the hotel.
What advantage has been taken of these clues?
None.
"It appears that the police suspect one of the visitors who was staying on the first floor and who disappeared in a doubtful manner.
Have they found him?
Have they established his identity?
No.
"The tragedy, therefore, remains as mysterious as at the beginning, the gloom is impenetrable.
"To complete the picture, we are told that dissension prevails between the prefect of police and his subordinate, M. Lenormand, and that the latter, finding himself less vigorously supported by the prime minister, virtually sent in his resignation several days ago.
According to our information, the conduct of the Kesselbach case is now in the hands of the deputy-chief of the detective-service, M. Weber, a personal enemy of M. Lenormand's.
"In short, disorder and confusion reign; and this in the face of Lupin, who stands for method, energy and steadfastness of mind.
"What conclusion do we draw from these facts?
Briefly, this: Lupin will release his accomplice to-day, the 31st of May, as he foretold."
This conclusion, which was echoed in all the other newspapers, was also the conclusion at which the general public had arrived.
And we must take it that the threat was not considered devoid of importance in high places, for the prefect of police and, in the absence of M. Lenormand, who was said to be unwell, the deputy-chief of the detective-service, M. Weber, had adopted the most stringent measures, both at the Palais de Justice and at the Sant&#233; Prison, where the prisoner was confined.
They did not dare, for sheer reasons of shame, to suspend on that particular day the examinations conducted daily by M. Formerie; but, from the prison to the Boulevard du Palais, a regular mobilization of police-forces guarded the streets along the line.
To the intense astonishment of one and all, the 31st of May passed and the threatened escape did not take place.
One thing did happen, an attempt to execute the plan, as was betrayed by a block of tramway-cars, omnibuses and drays along the road taken by the prison-van and the unaccountable breaking of one of the wheels of the van itself.
But the attempt assumed no more definite form.
Lupin, therefore, had met with a check.
The public felt almost disappointed and the police triumphed loudly.
On the next day, Saturday, an incredible rumour spread through the Palais and the newspaper-offices: J&#233;r&#244;me the messenger had disappeared.
Was it possible?
Although the special editions confirmed the news, people refused to believe it.
But, at six o'clock, a note published by the D&#233;p&#234;che du Soir made it official:
"We have received the following communication signed by Ars&#232;ne Lupin.
The special stamp affixed to it, in accordance with the circular which Lupin recently sent to the press, guarantees the genuineness of the document:
"'To the Editor of the D&#233;p&#234;che du Soir.
"Sir,
"'Pray make my apologies to the public for not keeping my word yesterday.
I remembered, at the last moment, that the 31st of May fell on a Friday!
Could I set my friend at liberty on a Friday?
I did not think it right to assume that responsibility.
"'I must also apologize for not on this occasion explaining, with my customary frankness, how this little event was managed. My process is so ingenious and so simple that I fear lest, if I revealed it, every criminal should be inspired by it.
How surprised people will be on the day when I am free to speak! "
Is that all?"
I shall be asked.
That is all; but it had to be thought of.
"'Permit me to be, Sir,
"'Your obedient servant,
"'Ars&#232;ne Lupin.'"
An hour later, M. Lenormand was rung up on the telephone and informed that Valenglay, the prime minister, wished to see him at the Ministry of the Interior.
"How well you're looking, my dear Lenormand!
And I who thought that you were ill and dared not leave your room!"
"I am not ill, Monsieur le Pr&#233;sident."
"So you were sulking in your tent!
...
But you were always a bad-tempered fellow."
"I confess to the bad temper, Monsieur le Pr&#233;sident, but not to the sulking."
"But you stay at home!
And Lupin takes advantage of it to release his friends..."
"How could I stop him?"
"How? Why, Lupin's trick was of the plainest. In accordance with his usual method, he announced the date of the escape beforehand; everybody believed in it; an apparent attempt was planned; the escape was not made; and, on the next day, when nobody is thinking about it &#8212; whoosh!
&#8212; the bird takes flight."
"Monsieur le Pr&#233;sident," said the chief of the detective-service, solemnly, "Lupin disposes of such means that we are not in a position to prevent what he has decided on.
The escape was mathematically certain.
I preferred to pass the hand ... and leave the laughter for others to face."
Valenglay chuckled:
"It's a fact that Monsieur le Pr&#233;fet de Police and M. Weber cannot be enjoying themselves at the present moment...
But, when all is said, can you explain to me, M. Lenormand ..."
"All that we know, Monsieur le Pr&#233;sident, is that the escape took place from the Palais de Justice. The prisoner was brought in a prison-van and taken to M. Formerie's room. He left M. Formerie's room, but he did not leave the Palais de Justice.
And yet nobody knows what became of him."
"It's most bewildering."
"Most bewildering."
"And has nothing else been discovered?"
"Yes. The inner corridor leading to the examining magistrates' rooms was blocked by an absolutely unprecedented crowd of prisoners, warders, counsel and doorkeepers; and it was discovered that all those people had received forged notices to appear at the same hour.
On the other hand, not one of the examining-magistrates who were supposed to have summoned them sat in his room that day; and this because of forged notices from the public prosecutor's office, sending them to every part of Paris ... and of the outskirts."
"Is that all?"
"No.
Two municipal guards and a prisoner were seen to cross the courtyards.
A cab was waiting for them outside and all three stepped in.
"And your supposition, Lenormand, your opinion..."
"My supposition, Monsieur le Pr&#233;sident, is that the two municipal guards were accomplices who, profiting by the disorder in the corridor, took the place of the three warders.
And my opinion is that this escape succeeded only through such special circumstances and so strange a combination of facts that we must look upon the most unlikely cases of complicity as absolutely certain.
Lupin, for that matter, has connections at the Palais that balk all our calculations.
He has agents in your ministry.
He has agents at the Prefecture of Police.
He has agents around me.
It is a formidable organization, a detective-service a thousand times more clever, more daring, more varied and more supple than that under my own orders."
"And you stand this, Lenormand?"
"No, I do not."
"Then why this slackness on your part since the beginning of the case?
What have you done against Lupin?"
"I have prepared for the struggle."
"Ah, capital!
And, while you were preparing, he was acting."
"So was I."
"And do you know anything?"
"I know a great deal."
"What?
Speak!"
Leaning on his stick, M. Lenormand took a little contemplative walk across the spacious room.
Then he sat down opposite Valenglay, brushed the facings of his olive-green coat with his finger-tips, settled his spectacles on his nose and said, plainly:
"M. le Pr&#233;sident, I hold three trump-cards in my hand.
First, I know the name under which Ars&#232;ne Lupin is hiding at this moment, the name under which he lived on the Boulevard Haussmann, receiving his assistants daily, reconstructing and directing his gang."
"But then why, in heaven's name, don't you arrest him?"
"I did not receive these particulars until later.
The prince &#8212; let us call him Prince Dash &#8212; has disappeared.
He is abroad, on other business."
"And, if he does not return ..."
"The position which he occupies, the manner in which he has flung himself into the Kesselbach case, necessitate his return and under the same name."
"Nevertheless ..."
"Monsieur le Pr&#233;sident, I come to my second trump.
I have at last discovered Pierre Leduc."
"Nonsense!"
"Or rather Lupin discovered him, and before disappearing, settled him in a little villa in the neighborhood of Paris."
"By Jove!
But how did you know ..."
"Oh, easily!
Lupin has placed two of his accomplices with Pierre Leduc, to watch him and defend him.
Now these accomplices are two of my own detectives, two brothers whom I employ in the greatest secrecy and who will hand him over to me at the first opportunity!"
"Well done you!
So that ..."
"So that, as Pierre Leduc, we may say, is the central point of the efforts of all those who are trying to solve the famous Kesselbach secret, I shall, sooner or later, through Pierre Leduc, catch, first, the author of the treble murder, because that miscreant substituted himself for Mr. Kesselbach in the accomplishment of an immense scheme and because Mr. Kesselbach had to find Pierre Leduc in order to be able to accomplish that scheme; and, secondly, Ars&#232;ne Lupin, because Ars&#232;ne Lupin is pursuing the same object."
"Splendid!
Pierre Leduc is the bait which you are throwing to the enemy."
"And the fish is biting, Monsieur le Pr&#233;sident.
I have just had word that a suspicious person was seen, a short time ago, prowling round the little villa where Pierre Leduc is living under the protection of my officers.
I shall be on the spot in four hours."
"And the third trump, Lenormand?"
"Monsieur le Pr&#233;sident, a letter arrived yesterday, addressed to Mr. Rudolf Kesselbach, which I intercepted..."
"Intercepted, eh?
You're getting on!"
"Yes, I intercepted it, opened it and kept it for myself. Here it is. It is dated two months back.
It bears the Capetown postmark and contains these words: 'My dear Rudolf, I shall be in Paris on the 1st of June and in just as wretched a plight as when you came to my assistance.
But I have great hopes of this Pierre Leduc affair of which I told you.
What a strange story it is!
Have you found the man I mean?
Where do we stand?
I am most anxious to know.'
The letter is signed, 'Steinweg.'
The first of June," continued M. Lenormand, "is to-day.
I have ordered one of my inspectors to hunt me out this Steinweg.
I have no doubt that he will succeed."
"Nor I, no doubt at all," cried Valenglay, rising from his chair, "and I make you every apology, my dear Lenormand, and my humble confession: I was on the point of letting you slide ... for good and all!
To-morrow I was expecting the prefect of police and M.
Weber."
"I knew that, Monsieur le Président."
"Impossible!"
"But for that, should I have put myself out? You now see my plan of campaign. On the one side, I am setting traps in which the murderer will be caught sooner or later. Pierre Leduc or Steinweg will deliver him into my hands.
On the other side, I am on Arsène Lupin's heels.
Two of his agents are in my pay and he believes them to be his most devoted helpers.
In addition to this, he is working for me, because he is pursuing the perpetrator of the threefold crime as I am.
Only, he imagines that he is dishing me, whereas it is I who am dishing him.
So I shall succeed, but on one condition..."
"What is that?"
"That I am given free scope and allowed to act according to the needs of the moment, without troubling about the public, who are growing impatient, or my superiors, who are intriguing against me."
"I agree."
"In that case, Monsieur le Président, in a few days from this I shall be the victor ... or I shall be dead."
At Saint-Cloud.
A little villa situated on one of the highest points of the upland, in an unfrequented road.
It was eleven o'clock at night.
M. Lenormand left his car at Saint-Cloud and walked cautiously along the road.
A shadow appeared.
"Is that you, Gourel?"
"Yes, chief."
"Did you tell the brothers Doudeville that I was coming?"
"Yes, your room is ready, you can go to bed and sleep ... unless they try to carry off Pierre Leduc to-night, which would not surprise me, considering the behavior of the fellow whom the Doudevilles saw."
They walked across the garden, softly entered the house and went up to the first floor.
The two brothers, Jean and Jacques Doudeville, were there.
"No news of Prince Sernine?"
asked Lenormand.
"No, chief."
"What about Pierre Leduc?"
"He spends the whole day lying flat on his back in his room on the ground-floor, or else in the garden.
He never comes up to see us."
"Is he better?"
"Much better.
The rest has made a great change in his appearance."
"Is he wholly devoted to Lupin?"
"To Prince Sernine, rather, for he does not suspect that the two are one and the same man. At least, I suppose so. One never knows, with him. He does not speak at all. Oh, he's a queer fish!
There's only one person who has the gift of cheering him up, of making him talk and even laugh.
That's a young girl from Garches, to whom Prince Sernine introduced him.
Geneviève Ernemont her name is.
She has been here three times already ... she was here to-day."
He added, jestingly, "I believe there's a little flirting going on... It's like his highness Prince Sernine and Mrs. Kesselbach... It seems he's making eyes at her! ...
That devil of a Lupin!"
M. Lenormand did not reply. But it was obvious that all these details, to which he seemed to attach no importance, were noted in the recesses of his memory, to be used whenever he might need to draw the logical inferences from them.
He lit a cigar, chewed it without smoking it, lit it again and dropped it.
He asked two or three more questions and then, dressed as he was, threw himself on his bed:
"If the least thing happens, let me be awakened...
If not, I shall sleep through the night... Go to your posts, all of you."
The others left the room.
An hour passed, two hours.
Suddenly, M. Lenormand felt some one touch him and Gourel said to him:
"Get up, chief; they have opened the gate."
"One man or two?"
"I only saw one ... the moon appeared just then ... he crouched down against a hedge."
"And the brothers Doudeville?"
"I sent them out by the back.
They will cut off his retreat when the time comes."
Gourel took M. Lenormand's hand, led him downstairs and then into a little dark room:
"Don't stir, chief; we are in Pierre Leduc's dressing-room. I am opening the door of the recess in which his bed stands... Don't be afraid ... he has taken his veronal as he does every evening ... nothing can wake him. Come this way... It's a good hiding-place, isn't it?
... These are the curtains of his bed... From here you can see the window and the whole side of the room between the window and the bed."
The casement stood open and admitted a vague light, which became very precise at times, when the moon burst through her veil of clouds.
The two men did not take their eyes from the empty window-frame, feeling certain that the event which they were awaiting would come from that side.
A slight, creaking noise ...
"He is climbing the trellis," whispered Gourel.
"Is it high?"
"Six feet or so."
The creaking became more distinct.
"Go, Gourel," muttered M. Lenormand, "find the Doudevilles, bring them back to the foot of the wall and bar the road to any one who tries to get down this way."
Gourel went.
At the same moment, a head appeared at the level of the window.
Then a leg was flung over the balcony.
M. Lenormand distinguished a slenderly-built man, below the middle height, dressed in dark colours and without a hat.
The man turned and, leaning over the balcony, looked for a few seconds into space, as though to make sure that no danger threatened him. Then he stooped down and lay at full length on the floor. He appeared motionless.
But soon M. Lenormand realized that the still blacker shadow which he formed against the surrounding darkness was coming forward, nearer.
It reached the bed.
M. Lenormand had an impression that he could hear the man's breathing and, at the same time, that he could just see his eyes, keen, glittering eyes, which pierced the darkness like shafts of fire and which themselves could see through that same darkness.
Pierre Leduc gave a deep sigh and turned over.
A fresh silence...
The man had glided along the bed with imperceptible movements and his dark outline now stood out against the whiteness of the sheets that hung down to the floor.
M. Lenormand could have touched him by putting out his arm.
This time, he clearly distinguished the breathing, which alternated with that of the sleeper, and he had the illusion that he also heard the sound of a heart beating.
Suddenly, a flash of light...
The man had pressed the spring of an electric lantern; and Pierre Leduc was lit full in the face, but the man remained in the shade, so that M. Lenormand was unable to see his features.
All that he saw was something that shone in the bright space; and he shuddered.
It was the blade of a knife; and that thin, tapering knife, more like a stiletto than a dagger, seemed to him identical with the weapon which he had picked up by the body of Chapman, Mr. Kesselbach's secretary.
He put forth all his will-power to restrain himself from springing upon the man.
He wanted first to know what the man had come to do.
The hand was raised. Was he going to strike? M. Lenormand calculated the distance in order to stop the blow... But no, it was not a murderous gesture, but one of caution. The hand would only fall if Pierre Leduc stirred or tried to call out.
And the man bent over the sleeper, as though he were examining something.
"The right cheek," thought M. Lenormand, "the scar on the right cheek...
He wants to make sure that it is really Pierre Leduc."
The man had turned a little to one side, so that only his shoulders were visible.
But his clothes, his overcoat, were so near that they brushed against the curtains behind which M. Lenormand was hiding.
"One movement on his part," thought the chief detective, "a thrill of alarm; and I shall collar him."
But the man, entirely absorbed in his examination, did not stir.
At last, after shifting the dagger to the hand that held the lantern, he raised the sheet, at first hardly at all, then a little more, then more still, until the sleeper's left arm was uncovered and the hand laid bare.
The flash of the lantern shone upon the hand.
The fingers lay outspread.
The little finger was cut on the second joint.
Again Pierre Leduc made a movement. The light was immediately put out; and, for an instant, the man remained beside the bed, motionless, standing straight up. Would he make up his mind to strike?
M. Lenormand underwent the agony of the crime which he could so easily prevent, but which he did not want to forestall before the very last second.
A long, a very long silence.
Suddenly, he saw or rather fancied that he saw an arm uplifted.
Instinctively he moved, stretching his hand above the sleeper.
In making this gesture, he hit against the man.
A dull cry.
The fellow struck out at space, defended himself at random and fled toward the window.
But M. Lenormand had leapt upon him and had his two arms around the man's shoulders.
He at once felt him yielding and, as the weaker of the two, powerless in Lenormand's hands, trying to avoid the struggle and to slip from between his arms.
Lenormand, exerting all his strength, held him flat against his chest, bent him in two and stretched him on his back on the floor.
"Ah, I've got him, I've got him!"
he muttered triumphantly.
And he felt a singular elation at imprisoning that terrifying criminal, that unspeakable monster, in his irresistible grip.
He felt him living and quivering, enraged and desperate, their two lives mingled, their breaths blended:
"Who are you?"
he asked.
"Who are you?
... You'll have to speak..."
And he clasped the enemy's body with still greater force, for he had an impression that that body was diminishing between his arms, that it was vanishing.
He gripped harder ... and harder...
And suddenly he shuddered from head to foot. He had felt, he still felt a tiny prick in the throat... In his exasperation, he gripped harder yet: the pain increased!
And he observed that the man had succeeded in twisting one arm round, slipping his hand to his chest and holding the dagger on end.
The arm, it was true, was incapable of motion; but the closer M. Lenormand tightened his grip, the deeper did the point of the dagger enter the proffered flesh.
He flung back his head a little to escape the point: the point followed the movement and the wound widened.
Then he moved no more, remembering the three crimes and all the alarming, atrocious and prophetic things represented by that same little steel needle which was piercing his skin and which, in its turn, was implacably penetrating...
Suddenly, he let go and gave a leap backwards.
Then, at once, he tried to resume the offensive.
It was too late.
The man flung his legs across the window-sill and jumped.
"Look out, Gourel!"
he cried, knowing that Gourel was there, ready to catch the fugitive.
He leant out.
A crunching of pebbles ... a shadow between two trees, the slam of the gate... And no other sound ... no interference...
Without giving a thought to Pierre Leduc, he called:
"Gourel!
...
Doudeville!"
No answer.
The great silence of the countryside at night...
In spite of himself, he continued to think of the treble murder, the steel dagger.
But no, it was impossible, the man had not had time, had not even had the need to strike, as he had found the road clear.
M. Lenormand jumped out in his turn and, switching on his lantern, recognized Gourel lying on the ground:
"Damn it!"
he swore.
"If they've killed him, they'll have to pay dearly for it."
But Gourel was not dead, only stunned; and, a few minutes later, he came to himself and growled:
"Only a blow of the fist, chief ... just a blow of the fist which caught me full in the chest.
But what a fellow!"
"There were two of them then?"
"Yes, a little one, who went up, and another, who took me unawares while I was watching."
"And the Doudevilles?"
"Haven't seen them."
One of them, Jacques, was found near the gate, bleeding from a punch in the jaw; the other a little farther, gasping for breath from a blow full on the chest.
"What is it?
What happened?"
asked M. Lenormand.
Jacques said that his brother and he had knocked up against an individual who had crippled them before they had time to defend themselves.
"Was he alone?"
"No; when he passed near us, he had a pal with him, shorter than himself."
"Did you recognize the man who struck you?"
"Judging by the breadth of his shoulders, I thought he might be the Englishman of the Palace Hotel, the one who left the hotel and whose traces we lost."
"The major?"
"Yes, Major Parbury."
After a moment's reflection, M. Lenormand said:
"There is no doubt possible.
There were two of them in the Kesselbach case: the man with the dagger, who committed the murders, and his accomplice, the major."
"That is what Prince Sernine thinks," muttered Jacques Doudeville.
"And to-night," continued the chief detective, "it is they again: the same two."
And he added, "So much the better.
The chance of catching two criminals is a hundred times greater than the chance of catching one."
M. Lenormand attended to his men, had them put to bed and looked to see if the assailants had dropped anything or left any traces.
He found nothing and went back to bed again himself.
In the morning, as Gourel and the Doudevilles felt none the worse for their injuries, he told the two brothers to scour the neighborhood and himself set out with Gourel for Paris, in order to hurry matters on and give his orders.
He lunched in his office.
At two o'clock, he heard good news.
One of his best detectives, Dieuzy, had picked up Steinweg, Rudolf Kesselbach's correspondent, as the German was stepping out of a train from Marseilles.
"Is Dieuzy there?"
"Yes, chief," said Gourel.
"He's here with the German."
"Have them brought in to me."
At that moment, the telephone-bell rang.
It was Jean Doudeville, speaking from the post-office at Garches.
The conversation did not take long:
"Is that you, Jean?
Any news?"
"Yes, chief, Major Parbury..."
"Well?"
"We have found him.
He has become a Spaniard and has darkened his skin.
We have just seen him.
He was entering the Garches free-school.
He was received by that young lady ... you know, the girl who knows Prince Sernine, Geneviève Ernemont."
"Thunder!"
M. Lenormand let go the receiver, made a grab at his hat, flew into the passage, met Dieuzy and the German, shouted to them to meet him in his office at six o'clock, rushed down the stairs, followed by Gourel and two inspectors whom he picked up on the way, and dived into a taxi-cab:
"Quick as you can to Garches ... ten francs for yourself!"
He stopped the car a little before the Parc de Villeneuve, at the turn of the lane that led to the school.
Jean Doudeville was waiting for him and at once exclaimed:
"He slipped away, ten minutes ago, by the other end of the lane."
"Alone?"
"No, with the girl."
M. Lenormand took Doudeville by the collar:
"Wretch!
You let him go!
But you ought to have ... you ought to have ..."
"My brother is on his track."
"A lot of good that will do us!
He'll stick your brother.
You're no match for him, either of you!"
He himself took the steering-wheel of the taxi, and resolutely drove into the lane, regardless of the cart-ruts and of the bushes on each side. They soon emerged on a parish-road, which took them to a crossway where five roads met.
M. Lenormand, without hesitation chose the one on the left, the Saint-Cucufa Road.
As a matter of fact, at the top of the slope that runs down to the lake, they met the other Doudeville brother, who shouted:
"They are in a carriage ... half a mile away."
The chief did not stop.
He sent the car flying down the incline, rushed along the bends, drove round the lake and suddenly uttered an exclamation of triumph.
Right at the top of a little hill that stood in front of them, he had seen the hood of a carriage.
Unfortunately, he had taken the wrong road and had to back the machine. When he reached the place where the roads branched, the carriage was still there, stationary. And, suddenly, while he was turning, he saw a girl spring from the carriage. A man appeared on the step.
The girl stretched out her arm.
Two reports rang out.
She had taken bad aim, without a doubt, for a head looked round the other side of the hood and the man, catching sight of the motor-cab, gave his horse a great lash with the whip and it started off at a gallop.
The next moment, a turn of the road hid the carriage from sight.
M. Lenormand finished his tacking in a few seconds, darted straight up the incline, passed the girl without stopping and turned round boldly.
He found himself on a steep, pebbly forest road, which ran down between dense woods and which could only be followed very slowly and with the greatest caution.
But what did he care!
Twenty yards in front of him, the carriage, a sort of two-wheeled cabriolet, was dancing over the stones, drawn, or rather held back, by a horse which knew enough only to go very carefully, feeling its way and taking no risks.
There was nothing to fear; escape was impossible.
And the two conveyances went shaking and jolting down-hill. At one moment, they were so close together that M. Lenormand thought of alighting and running with his men.
But he felt the danger of putting on the brake on so steep a slope; and he went on, pressing the enemy closely, like a prey which one keeps within sight, within touch...
"We've got him, chief, we've got him!"
muttered the inspectors, excited by the unexpected nature of the chase.
At the bottom, the way flattened out into a road that ran towards the Seine, towards Bougival.
The horse, on reaching level ground, set off at a jog-trot, without hurrying itself and keeping to the middle of the road.
A violent effort shook the taxi.
It appeared, instead of rolling, to proceed by bounds, like a darting fawn, and, slipping by the roadside slope, ready to smash any obstacle, it caught up the carriage, came level with it, passed it...
An oath from M. Lenormand ... shouts of fury...
The carriage was empty!
The carriage was empty.
The horse was going along peacefully, with the reins on its back, no doubt returning to the stable of some inn in the neighborhood, where it had been hired for the day...
Suppressing his inward rage, the chief detective merely said:
"The major must have jumped out during the few seconds when we lost sight of the carriage, at the top of the descent."
"We have only to beat the woods, chief, and we are sure ..."
"To return empty-handed.
The beggar is far away by this time.
He's not one of those who are caught twice in one day.
Oh, hang it all, hang it all!"
They went back to the young girl, whom they found in the company of Jacques Doudeville and apparently none the worse for her adventure.
M. Lenormand introduced himself, offered to take her back home and at once questioned her about the English major, Parbury.
She expressed astonishment:
"He is neither English nor a major; and his name is not Parbury."
"Then what is his name?"
"Juan Ribeira.
He is a Spaniard sent by his government to study the working of the French schools."
"As you please.
His name and his nationality are of no importance.
He is the man we are looking for.
Have you known him long?"
"A fortnight or so.
He had heard about a school which I have founded at Garches and he interested himself in my experiment to the extent of proposing to make me an annual grant, on the one condition that he might come from time to time to observe the progress of my pupils.
I had not the right to refuse..."
"No, of course not; but you should have consulted your acquaintances.
Is not Prince Sernine a friend of yours?
He is a man of good counsel."
"Oh, I have the greatest confidence in him; but he is abroad at present."
"Did you not know his address?"
"No.
And, besides, what could I have said to him?
That gentleman behaved very well.
It was not until to-day ...
But I don't know if ..."
"I beg you, mademoiselle, speak frankly.
You can have confidence in me also."
"Well, M. Ribeira came just now.
He told me that he had been sent by a French lady who was paying a short visit to Bougival, that this lady had a little girl whose education she would like to entrust to me and that she wished me to come and see her without delay.
The thing seemed quite natural.
And, as this is a holiday and as M. Ribeira had hired a carriage which was waiting for him at the end of the road, I made no difficulty about accepting a seat in it."
"But what was his object, after all?"
She blushed and said:
"To carry me off, quite simply.
He confessed it to me after half an hour..."
"Do you know nothing about him?"
"No."
"Does he live in Paris?"
"I suppose so."
"Has he ever written to you?
Do you happen to have a few lines in his handwriting, anything which he left behind, that may serve us as a clue?"
"No clue at all... Oh, wait a minute ... but I don't think that has any importance..."
"Speak, speak ... please..."
"Well, two days ago, the gentleman asked permission to use my typewriting machine; and he typed out &#8212; with difficulty, for he evidently had no practice &#8212; a letter of which I saw the address by accident."
"What was the address?"
"He was writing to the Journal and he put about twenty stamps into the envelope."
"Yes ... the agony-column, no doubt," said M. Lenormand.
"I have to-day's number with me, chief," said Gourel.
M. Lenormand unfolded the sheet and looked at the eighth page.
Presently, he gave a start.
He had read the following sentence, printed with the usual abbreviation:
"To any person knowing Mr. Steinweg.
Advertiser wishes to know if he is in Paris and his address.
Reply through this column."
Personal advertisements in the French newspapers are charged by the line, not by the word; and consequently nearly every word is clipped down to two, three or four letters.
&#8212; Translator's Note.
"Steinweg!"
exclaimed Gourel.
"But that's the very man whom Dieuzy is bringing to you!"
"Yes, yes," said M. Lenormand, to himself, "it's the man whose letter to Mr. Kesselbach I intercepted, the man who put Kesselbach on the track of Pierre Leduc...
So they, too, want particulars about Pierre Leduc and his past?
...
They, too, are groping in the dark?
..."
He rubbed his hands: Steinweg was at his disposal. In less than an hour, Steinweg would have spoken.
In less than an hour, the murky veil which oppressed him and which made the Kesselbach case the most agonizing and the most impenetrable that he had ever had in hand: that veil would be torn asunder.
M. Lenormand was back in his room at the Prefecture of Police at six o'clock in the evening.
He at once sent for Dieuzy:
"Is your man here?"
"Yes, chief."
"How far have you got with him?"
"Not very.
He won't speak a word.
I told him that, by a new regulation, foreigners were 'bliged to make a declaration at the Prefecture as to the object and the probable length of their stay in Paris; and I brought him here, to your secretary's office."
"I will question him."
But, at that moment, an office-messenger appeared:
"There's a lady asking to see you at once, chief."
"Have you her card?"
"Here, chief."
"Mrs. Kesselbach!
Show her in."
He walked across the room to receive the young widow at the door and begged her to take a seat.
She still wore the same disconsolate look, the same appearance of illness and that air of extreme lassitude which revealed the distress of her life.
She held out a copy of the Journal and pointed to the line in the agony-column which mentioned Steinweg:
"Old Steinweg was a friend of my husband's," she said, "and I have no doubt that he knows a good many things."
"Dieuzy," said M. Lenormand, "bring the person who is waiting...
Your visit, madame, will not have been useless.
I will only ask you, when this person enters, not to say a word."
The door opened.
A man appeared, an old man with white whiskers meeting under his chin and a face furrowed with deep wrinkles, poorly clad and wearing the hunted look of those wretches who roam about the world in search of their daily pittance.
He stood on the threshold, blinking his eyelids, stared at M. Lenormand, seemed confused by the silence that greeted him on his entrance and turned his hat in his hands with embarrassment.
But, suddenly, he appeared stupefied, his eyes opened wide and he stammered:
"Mrs... Mrs.
Kesselbach!"
He had seen the young widow.
And, recovering his serenity, smiling, losing his shyness, he went up to her and in a strong German accent:
"Oh, I am glad!
... At last!
...
I thought I should never ...
I was so surprised to receive no news down there ... no telegrams... And how is our dear Rudolf Kesselbach?"
The lady staggered back, as though she had been struck in the face, and at once fell into a chair and began to sob.
"What's the matter?
... Why, what's the matter?"
asked Steinweg.
M. Lenormand interposed:
"I see, sir, that you know nothing about certain events that have taken place recently.
Have you been long travelling?"
"Yes, three months...
I had been up to the Rand.
Then I went back to Capetown and wrote to Rudolf from there.
But, on my way home by the East Coast route, I accepted some work at Port Said.
Rudolf has had my letter, I suppose?"
"He is away. I will explain the reason of his absence. But, first, there is a point on which we should be glad of some information.
It has to do with a person whom you knew and to whom you used to refer, in your intercourse with Mr. Kesselbach, by the name of Pierre Leduc."
"Pierre Leduc!
What!
Who told you?"
The old man was utterly taken aback.
He spluttered out again:
"Who told you?
Who disclosed to you ...
?"
"Mr.
Kesselbach."
"Never!
It was a secret which I confided to him and Rudolf keeps his secrets ... especially this one ..."
"Nevertheless, it is absolutely necessary that you should reply to our questions.
We are at this moment engaged on an inquiry about Pierre Leduc which must come to a head without delay; and you alone can enlighten us, as Mr. Kesselbach is no longer here."
"Well, then," cried Steinweg, apparently making up his mind, "what do you want?"
"Do you know Pierre Leduc?"
"I have never seen him, but I have long been the possessor of a secret which concerns him.
Through a number of incidents which I need not relate and thanks to a series of chances, I ended by acquiring the certainty that the man in whose discovery I was interested was leading a dissolute life in Paris and that he was calling himself Pierre Leduc, which is not his real name."
"But does he know his real name himself?"
"I presume so."
"And you?"
"Yes, I know it."
"Well, tell it to us."
He hesitated; then, vehemently:
"I can't," he said.
"No, I can't."
"But why not?"
"I have no right to. The whole secret lies there.
When I revealed the secret to Rudolf, he attached so much importance to it that he gave me a large sum of money to purchase my silence and he promised me a fortune, a real fortune, on the day when he should succeed, first, in finding Pierre Leduc and, next, in turning the secret to account."
He smiled bitterly. "
The large sum of money is already lost.
I came to see how my fortune was getting on."
"Mr. Kesselbach is dead," said the chief detective.
Steinweg gave a bound:
"Dead!
Is it possible?
No, it's a trap.
Mrs. Kesselbach, is it true?"
She bowed her head.
He seemed crushed by this unexpected revelation; and, at the same time, it must have been infinitely painful to him, for he began to cry:
"My poor Rudolf, I knew him when he was a little boy... He used to come and play at my house at Augsburg... I was very fond of him." And, calling Mrs. Kesselbach to witness, "And he of me, was he not, Mrs. Kesselbach?
He must have told you... His old Daddy Steinweg, he used to call me."
M. Lenormand went up to him and, in his clearest voice:
"Listen to me," he said. "Mr. Kesselbach died murdered... Come, be calm ... exclamations are of no use... He died murdered, I say, and all the circumstances of the crime prove that the culprit knew about the scheme in question.
Was there anything in the nature of that scheme that would enable you to guess ... ?"
Steinweg stood dumfounded.
He stammered:
"It was my fault...
If I had not suggested the thing to him ..."
Mrs. Kesselbach went up to him, entreating him:
"Do you think ... have you any idea?
... Oh, Steinweg, I implore you!
..."
"I have no idea...
I have not reflected," he muttered.
"I must have time to reflect..."
"Cast about in Mr. Kesselbach's surroundings," said M. Lenormand.
"Did nobody take part in your interviews at that time?
Was there nobody in whom he himself could have confided?"
"No."
"Think well."
Both the others, Dolores and M. Lenormand, leant toward him, anxiously awaiting his answer.
"No," he said, "I don't see..."
"Think well," repeated the chief detective.
"The murderer's Christian name and surname begin with an L and an M."
"An L," he echoed.
"I don't see ... an L ... an M..."
"Yes, the initials are in gold on the corner of a cigarette-case belonging to the murderer."
"A cigarette-case?"
asked Steinweg, making an effort of memory.
"A gun-metal case ... and one of the compartments is divided into two spaces, the smaller for cigarette-papers, the other for tobacco..."
"Two spaces, two spaces," repeated Steinweg, whose thoughts seemed stimulated by that detail.
"Couldn't you show it to me?"
"Here it is, or rather this is an exact reproduction," said M. Lenormand, giving him a cigarette-case.
"Eh!
What!"
said Steinweg, taking the case in his hands.
He looked at it with stupid eyes, examined it, turned it over in every direction and, suddenly, gave a cry, the cry of a man struck with a horrible idea.
And he stood like that, livid, with trembling hands and wild, staring eyes.
"Speak, come, speak!"
said M. Lenormand.
"Oh," he said, as though blinded with light, "now all is explained!
..."
"Speak, speak!"
He walked across to the windows with a tottering step, then returned and, rushing up to the chief detective:
"Sir, sir ... Rudolf's murderer ...
I'll tell you... Well ..."
He stopped short.
"Well?"
There was a moment's pause... Was the name of the odious criminal about to echo through the great silence of the office, between those walls which had heard so many accusations, so many confessions?
M. Lenormand felt as if he were on the brink of the unfathomable abyss and as if a voice were mounting, mounting up to him... A few seconds more and he would know...
"No," muttered Steinweg, "no, I can't..."
"What's that you say?"
cried the chief detective, furiously.
"I say that I can't."
"But you have no right to be silent.
The law requires you to speak."
"To-morrow...
I will speak to-morrow ...
I must have time to reflect... To-morrow, I will tell you all that I know about Pierre Leduc ... all that I suppose about that cigarette-case... To-morrow, I promise you..."
It was obvious that he possessed that sort of obstinacy against which the most energetic efforts are of no avail.
M. Lenormand yielded:
"Very well.
I give you until to-morrow, but I warn you that, if you do not speak to-morrow, I shall be obliged to go to the examining-magistrate."
He rang and, taking Inspector Dieuzy aside, said:
"Go with him to his hotel ... and stay there...
I'll send you two men... And mind you keep your eyes about you.
Somebody may try to get hold of him."
The inspector went off with Steinweg; and M. Lenormand, returning to Mrs. Kesselbach, who had been violently affected by this scene, made his excuses.
"Pray accept all my regrets, madame...
I can understand how upset you must feel..."
He questioned her as to the period at which Mr. Kesselbach renewed his relations with old Steinweg and as to the length of time for which those relations lasted.
But she was so much worn-out that he did not insist.
"Am I to come back to-morrow?"
she asked.
"No, it's not necessary.
I will let you know all that Steinweg says.
May I see you down to your carriage?
These three flights are rather steep..."
He opened the door and stood back to let her pass.
At that moment shouts were heard in the passage and people came running up, inspectors on duty, office-messengers, clerks:
"Chief!
Chief!"
"What's the matter?"
"Dieuzy!
..."
"But he's just left here..."
"He's been found on the staircase..."
"Not dead?
..."
"No, stunned, fainting..."
"But the man ... the man who was with him ... old Steinweg?"
"He's disappeared..."
"Damn it!"
He rushed along the passage and down the stairs, where he found Dieuzy lying on the first-floor landing, surrounded by people who were attending to him.
He saw Gourel coming up again:
"Oh, Gourel, have you been downstairs?
Did you come across anybody?"
"No, chief..."
But Dieuzy was recovering consciousness and, almost before he had opened his eyes, mumbled:
"Here, on the landing, the little door..."
"Oh, hang it, the door of Court 7!"
shouted the chief detective.
"Didn't I say that it was to be kept locked?
...
It was certain that, sooner or later ..." He seized the door-handle.
"Oh, of course!
The door is bolted on the other side now!"
Since M. Lenormand left the detective service, two other criminals have escaped by the same door, after shaking off the officers in charge of them; the police kept both cases dark.
Nevertheless, it would be very easy, if this communication is absolutely required, to remove the useless bolt on the other side of the door, which enables the fugitive to cut off all pursuit and to walk away quietly through the passage leading to Civil Court 7 and through the corridor of the Chief President's Court.
The door was partly glazed.
He smashed a pane with the butt-end of his revolver, drew the bolt and said to Gourel:
"Run through this way to the exit on the Place Dauphine..."
He went back to Dieuzy:
"Come, Dieuzy, tell me about it.
How did you come to let yourself be put into this state?"
"A blow in the pit of the stomach, chief..."
"A blow?
From that old chap?
... Why, he can hardly stand on his legs!
..."
"Not the old man, chief, but another, who was walking up and down the passage while Steinweg was with you and who followed us as though he were going out, too... When we got as far as this, he asked me for a light...
I looked for my matches ... Then he caught me a punch in the stomach... I fell down, and, as I fell, I thought I saw him open that door and drag the old man with him..."
"Would you know him again?"
"Oh yes, chief ... a powerful fellow, very dark-skinned ... a southerner of sorts, that's certain..."
"Ribeira," snarled M. Lenormand. "Always Ribeira! ... Ribeira, alias Parbury... Oh, the impudence of the scoundrel! He was afraid of what old Steinweg might say ... and came to fetch him away under my very nose!"
And, stamping his foot with anger, "But, dash it, how did he know that Steinweg was here, the blackguard!
It's only four hours since I was chasing him in the Saint-Cucufa woods ... and now he's here! ...
How did he know?
... One would think he lived inside my skin! ..."
He was seized with one of those fits of dreaming in which he seemed to hear nothing and see nothing.
Mrs. Kesselbach, who passed at that moment, bowed without his replying.
But a sound of footsteps in the corridor roused him from his lethargy.
"At last, is that you, Gourel?"
"I've found out how it was, chief," said Gourel, panting for breath. "There were two of them. They went this way and out of the Place Dauphine. There was a motor-car waiting for them.
There were two people inside: one was a man dressed in black, with a soft hat pulled over his eyes ..."
"That's he," muttered M. Lenormand, "that's the murderer, the accomplice of Ribeira, &#8212; Parbury.
And who was the other?"
"A woman, a woman without a hat, a servant-girl, it might be... And good-looking, I'm told, with red hair."
"Eh, what!
You say she had red hair?"
"Yes."
M. Lenormand turned round with a bound, ran down the stairs four steps at a time, hurried across the courtyard and came out on the Quai des Orf&#232;vres:
"Stop!"
he shouted.
A victoria and pair was driving off.
It was Mrs. Kesselbach's carriage.
The coachman heard and pulled up his horses.
M. Lenormand sprang on the step:
"I beg a thousand pardons, madame, but I cannot do without your assistance.
I will ask you to let me go with you...
But we must act swiftly... Gourel, where's my taxi?"
"I've sent it away, chief."
"Well then, get another, quick!"
...
The men all ran in different directions.
But ten minutes elapsed before one of them returned with a motor-cab.
M. Lenormand was boiling with impatience.
Mrs. Kesselbach, standing on the pavement, swayed from side to side, with her smelling-salts in her hand.
At last they were seated.
"Gourel, get up beside the driver and go straight to Garches."
"To my house?"
asked Dolores, astounded.
He did not reply.
He leant out of the window, waved his pass, explained who he was to the policeman regulating the traffic in the streets.
At last, when they reached the Cours-la-Reine, he sat down again and said:
"I beseech you, madame, to give me plain answers to my questions.
Did you see Mlle.
Genevi&#232;ve Ernemont just now, at about four o'clock?"
"Genevi&#232;ve?
...
Yes...
I was dressing to go out."
"Did she tell you of the advertisement about Steinweg in the Journal?"
"She did."
"And it was that which made you come to see me?"
"Yes."
"Were you alone during Mlle.
Ernemont's visit?"
"Upon my word, I can't say...
Why?"
"Recollect.
Was one of your servants present?"
"Probably ... as I was dressing..."
"What are their names?"
"Suzanne and Gertrude."
"One of them has red hair, has she not?"
"Yes, Gertrude."
"Have you known her long?"
"Her sister has always been with me ... and so has Gertrude, for years... She is devotion and honesty personified..."
"In short, you will answer for her?"
"Oh, absolutely!"
"Very well ... very well."
It was half-past seven and the daylight was beginning to wane when the taxi-cab reached the House of Retreat.
Without troubling about his companion, the chief detective rushed into the porter's lodge:
"Mrs. Kesselbach's maid has just come in, has she not?"
"Whom do you mean, the maid?"
"Why, Gertrude, one of the two sisters."
"But Gertrude can't have been out, sir.
We haven't seen her go out."
"Still some one has just come in."
"No, sir, we haven't opened the door to anybody since &#8212; let me see &#8212; six o'clock this evening."
"Is there no other way out than this gate?"
"No.
The walls surround the estate on every side and they are very high..."
"Mrs. Kesselbach, we will go to your house, please."
They all three went.
Mrs. Kesselbach, who had no key, rang.
The door was answered by Suzanne, the other sister.
"Is Gertrude in?"
asked Mrs. Kesselbach.
"Yes, ma'am, in her room."
"Send her down, please," said the chief detective.
After a moment, Gertrude came downstairs, looking very attractive and engaging in her white embroidered apron.
She had, in point of fact, a rather pretty face, crowned with red hair.
M. Lenormand looked at her for a long time without speaking, as though he were trying to read what lay behind those innocent eyes.
He asked her no questions.
After a minute, he simply said:
"That will do, thank you.
Come, Gourel."
He went out with the sergeant and, at once, as they followed the darkling paths of the garden, said:
"That's the one!"
"Do you think so, chief?
She looked so placid!"
"Much too placid. Another would have been astonished, would have wanted to know why I sent for her. Not this one! Nothing but the concentrated effort of a face that is determined to smile at all costs.
Only, I saw a drop of perspiration trickle from her temple along her ear."
"So that ... ?
"So that everything becomes plain. Gertrude is in league with the two ruffians who are conspiring round the Kesselbach case, in order either to discover and carry out the famous scheme, or to capture the widow's millions. No doubt, the other sister is in the plot as well.
At four o'clock, Gertrude, learning that I know of the advertisement in the Journal, takes advantage of her mistress's absence, hastens to Paris, finds Ribeira and the man in the soft hat and drags them off to the Palais, where Ribeira annexes Master Steinweg for his own purposes."
He reflected and concluded:
"All this proves, first, the importance which they attach to Steinweg and their fear of what he may reveal; secondly, that a regular plot is being hatched around Mrs. Kesselbach; thirdly, that I have no time to lose, for the plot is ripe."
"Very well," said Gourel, "but one thing remains unexplained.
How was Gertrude able to leave the garden in which we now are and to enter it again, unknown to the porter and his wife?"
"Through a secret passage which the rogues must have contrived to make quite recently."
"And which would end, no doubt," said Gourel, "in Mrs. Kesselbach's house."
"Yes, perhaps," said M. Lenormand, "perhaps ...
But I have another idea."
They followed the circuit of the wall.
It was a bright night; and, though their two forms were hardly distinguishable, they themselves could see enough to examine the stones of the walls and to convince themselves that no breach, however skilful, had been effected.
"A ladder, very likely?"
suggested Gourel.
"No, because Gertrude is able to get out in broad daylight.
A communication of the kind I mean can evidently not end out of doors.
The entrance must be concealed by some building already in existence."
"There are only the four garden-houses," objected Gourel, "and they are all inhabited."
"I beg your pardon: the third, the Pavillon Hortense, is not inhabited."
"Who told you so?"
"The porter.
Mrs. Kesselbach hired this house, which is near her own, for fear of the noise.
Who knows but that, in so doing, she acted under Gertrude's influence?"
He walked round the house in question.
The shutters were closed.
He lifted the latch of the door, on the off-chance; the door opened.
"Ah, Gourel, I think we've struck it!
Let's go in.
Light your lantern... Oh, the hall... the drawing-room ... the dining-room ... that's no use.
There must be a basement, as the kitchen is not on this floor."
"This way, chief ... the kitchen-stairs are here."
They went down into a rather large kitchen, crammed full of wicker-work garden-chairs and flower-stands.
Beside it was a wash-house, which also served as a cellar, and which presented the same untidy sight of objects piled one on the top of the other.
"What is that shiny thing down there, chief?"
Gourel stooped and picked up a brass pin with a head made of an imitation pearl.
"The pearl is quite bright still," said M. Lenormand, "which it would not be if it had been lying in this cellar long.
Gertrude passed this way, Gourel."
Gourel began to demolish a great stack of empty wine-casks, writing desks and old rickety tables.
"You are wasting your time," said M. Lenormand. "If that is the way out, how would she have time first to move all those things and then to replace them behind her?
Look, here is a shutter out of use, which has no valid reason for being fastened to the wall by that nail.
Draw it back."
Gourel did so.
Behind the shutter, the wall was hollowed out.
By the light of the lantern they saw an underground passage running downwards.
"I was right," said M. Lenormand.. "The communication is of recent date.
You see, it's a piece of work hurriedly done, and not intended to last for any length of time... No masonry... Two planks placed cross-wise at intervals, with a joist to serve as a roof; and that is all.
It will hold up as best it may: well enough, in any case, for the object in view, that is to say ..."
"That is to say what, chief?"
"Well, first to allow of the going backwards and forwards between Gertrude and her accomplices ... and then, one day, one day soon, of the kidnapping, or rather the total, miraculous, incomprehensible disappearance of Mrs.
Kesselbach."
They proceeded cautiously, so as not to knock against certain beams which did not look over-safe. It at once became evident that the tunnel was much longer than the fifty yards at most that separated the house from the boundary of the garden.
It must, therefore, end at a fair distance from the walls and beyond the road that skirted the property.
"We are not going in the direction of Villeneuve and the lake are we?"
asked Gourel.
"Not at all, the other way about," declared M. Lenormand.
The tunnel descended with a gentle slope.
There was a step, then another; and they veered toward the right.
They at once knocked up against a door which was fitted into a rubble frame, carefully cemented.
M. Lenormand pushed it and it opened.
"One second, Gourel," he said, stopping.
"Let us think...
It might perhaps be wiser to turn back."
"Why?"
"We must reflect that Ribeira will have foreseen the danger and presume that he has taken his precautions, in case the underground passage should be discovered. Now he knows that we are on his track. He knows that we are searching the garden.
He no doubt saw us enter the house.
How do I know that he is not at this moment laying a trap for us?"
"There are two of us, chief..."
"And suppose there were twenty of them?"
He looked in front of him.
The tunnel sloped upward again, closed by another door, which was at five or six yards' distance.
"Let us go so far," he said.
"Then we shall see."
He passed through, followed by Gourel, whom he told to leave the first door open, and walked to the other door, resolving within himself to go no farther.
But this second door was shut; and though the lock seemed to work, he could not succeed in opening it.
"The door is bolted," he said.
"Let us make no noise and go back.
The more so as, outside, by remembering the position of the tunnel, we can fix the line along which to look for the other outlet."
They therefore retraced their steps to the first door, when Gourel, who was walking ahead, gave an exclamation of surprise:
"Why, it's closed!
..."
"How is that?
When I told you to leave it open!"
"I did leave it open, chief, but the door must have fallen back of its own weight."
"Impossible!
We should have heard the sound."
"Then?
..."
"Then ... then ...
I don't know ..." He went up to the door.
"Let's see, ... there's a key ... does it turn?
...
Yes, it turns.
But there seems to be a bolt on the other side."
"Who can have fastened it?"
"They, of course!
Behind our backs!
... Perhaps they have another tunnel that runs above this one, alongside of it ... or else they were waiting in that empty house...
In any case, we're caught in a trap..."
He grew angry with the lock, thrust his knife into the chink of the door, tried every means and then, in a moment of weariness, said:
"There's nothing to be done!"
"What, chief, nothing to be done?
In that case, we're diddled!"
"I dare say!"
said M. Lenormand...
They returned to the other door and came back again to the first.
Both were solid, made of hard wood, strengthened with cross-beams ... in short, indestructible.
"We should want a hatchet," said the chief of the detective-service, "or at the very least, a serious implement ... a knife even, with which we might try to cut away the place where the bolt is most likely to be ... and we have nothing..."
He was seized with a sudden fit of rage and flung himself upon the obstacle, as though he hoped to do away with it.
Then, powerless, beaten, he said to Gourel:
"Listen, we'll look into this in an hour or two...
I am tired out...
I am going to sleep... Keep watch so long ... and if they come and attack us ..."
"Ah, if they come, we shall be saved, chief!"
cried Gourel, who would have been relieved by a fight, however great the odds.
M. Lenormand lay down on the ground.
In a minute, he was asleep.
When he woke up, he remained for some seconds undecided, not understanding; and he also asked himself what sort of pain it was that was tormenting him:
"Gourel!"
he called.
"Come!
Gourel!"
Obtaining no reply, he pressed the spring of his lantern and saw Gourel lying beside him, sound asleep.
"What on earth can this pain be?"
he thought.
"Regular twitchings... Oh, why, of course, I am hungry, that's all...
I'm starving!
What can the time be?"
His watch marked twenty minutes past seven, but he remembered that he had not wound it up.
Gourel's watch was not going either.
Gourel had awoke under the action of the same inward pangs, which made them think that the breakfast-hour must be long past and that they had already slept for a part of the day.
"My legs are quite numbed," said Gourel, "and my feet feel as if they were on ice. What a funny sensation!"
He bent down to rub them and went on: "Why, it's not on ice that my feet were, but in water... Look, chief ... there's a regular pool near the first door..."
"Soaked through," M. Lenormand replied.
"We'll go back to the second door; you can dry yourself ..."
"But what are you doing, chief?"
"Do you think I am going to allow myself to be buried alive in this vault?
... Not if I know it; I haven't reached the age!
... As the two doors are closed, let us try to pass through the walls."
One by one he loosened the stones that stood out at the height of his hand, in the hope of contriving another gallery that would slope upwards to the level of the soil.
But the work was long and painful, for in this part of the tunnel, as he perceived the stones were cemented.
"Chief ... chief," stammered Gourel, in a stifled voice...
"Well?"
"You are standing with your feet in the water."
"Nonsense!
... Why, so I am!
... Well, it can't be helped...
I'll dry them in the sun..."
"But don't you see?"
"What?"
"Why, it's rising, chief, it's rising!
..."
"What's rising?"
"The water!
..."
M. Lenormand felt a shudder pass over his skin.
He suddenly understood.
It was not a casual trickling through, as he had thought, but a carefully-prepared flood, mechanically, irresistibly produced by some infernal system.
"Oh, the scoundrel!"
he snarled.
"If ever I lay hands on him ...
!"
"Yes, yes, chief, but we must first get out of this... And, as far as I can see ..."
Gourel seemed completely prostrated, incapable of having an idea, of proposing a plan.
M. Lenormand knelt down on the ground and measured the rate at which the water was rising.
A quarter, or thereabouts, of the first door was covered; and the water was half-way toward the second door.
"The progress is slow, but uninterrupted," he said "In a few hours it will be over our heads."
"But this is terrible, chief, it's horrible!"
moaned Gourel.
"Oh, look here, don't come boring me with your lamentations, do you understand?
Cry, if it amuses you, but don't let me hear you!"
"It's the hunger that weakens me, chief; my brain's going round."
"Bite your fist!"
As Gourel said, the position was terrible; and, if M. Lenormand had had less energy, he would have abandoned the vain struggle. What was to be done? It was no use hoping that Ribeira would have the charity to let them out.
It was no use either hoping that the brothers Doudeville would rescue them, for the inspectors did not know of the existence of the tunnel.
So no hope remained ... no hope but that of an impossible miracle...
"Come, come," said M. Lenormand, "this is too silly.
We're not going to kick the bucket here!
Hang it all, there must be something!
... Show me a light, Gourel."
Flattening himself against the second door, he examined it from top to bottom, in every corner.
There was an enormous bolt on that side, just as there probably was on the other.
He unfastened the screws with the blade of his knife; and the bolt came off in his hand.
"And what next?"
asked Gourel.
"What next?"
he echoed.
"Well, this bolt is made of iron, pretty long and very nearly pointed.
Certainly, it's not as good as a pick-axe, but it's better than nothing and ..."
Without finishing his sentence, he drove the implement into the side-wall of the tunnel, a little in front of the pillar of masonry that supported the hinges of the door.
As he expected, once he had passed the first layer of cement and stones, he found soft earth:
"To work!"
he cried.
"Certainly, chief, but would you explain ...
?"
"It's quite simple.
I want to dig round this pillar a passage, three or four yards long, which will join the tunnel on the other side of the door and allow us to escape."
"But it will take us hours; and meanwhile, the water is rising."
"Show me a light, Gourel."
"In twenty minutes, or half an hour at most, it will have reached our feet."
"Show me a light, Gourel."
M. Lenormand's idea was correct and, with some little exertion, by pulling the earth, which he first loosened with his implement, towards him and making it fall into the tunnel, he was not long in digging a hole large enough to slip into.
"It's my turn, chief!"
said Gourel.
"Aha, you're returning to life, I see!
Well, fire away!
... You have only to follow the shape of the pillar."
At that moment, the water was up to their ankles.
Would they have time to complete the work begun?
It became more difficult as they went on, for the earth which they disturbed was in their way; and, lying flat on their stomachs in the passage, they were obliged at every instant to remove the rubbish that obstructed them.
After two hours, the work was perhaps three-quarters through, but the water now covered their legs.
Another hour and it would reach the opening of the hole which they were digging.
And that would mean the end!
Gourel, who was exhausted by the want of food and who was too stout to move with any freedom in that ever-narrower passage, had had to give up.
He no longer stirred, trembling with anguish at feeling that icy water which was gradually swallowing him up.
As for M. Lenormand, he worked on with indefatigable ardor. It was a terrible job, this ants' work performed in the stifling darkness. His hands were bleeding. He was fainting with hunger.
The insufficiency of the air hampered his breathing; and, from time to time, Gourel's sighs reminded him of the awful danger that threatened him at the bottom of his hole.
But nothing could discourage him, for now he again found opposite him those cemented stones which formed the side-wall of the gallery.
It was the most difficult part, but the end was at hand.
"It's rising," cried Gourel, in a choking voice, "it's rising!"
M. Lenormand redoubled his efforts.
Suddenly the stem of the bolt which he was using leapt out into space.
The passage was dug.
He had now only to widen it, which became much easier once he was able to shoot the materials in front of him.
Gourel, mad with terror, was howling like a dying beast.
M. Lenormand paid no attention to him.
Safety was at hand.
Nevertheless, he had a few seconds of anxiety when he perceived, by the sound of the materials falling, that this part of the tunnel was also under water, which was natural, as the door did not form a sufficiently tight-fitting barrier. But what did it matter! The outlet was free.
One last effort ... he passed through.
"Come, Gourel," he cried, returning to fetch his companion.
He dragged him, half dead, by the wrists:
"Come along, booby, pull yourself together!
We are saved."
"Do you really think so, chief?
...
The water's up to our chests..."
"Never mind, as long as it's not over our mouths... Where's your lantern?"
"It's not working."
"No matter."
He gave an exclamation of delight.
"One step ... two steps!
... A staircase... At last!"
They emerged from the water, that accursed water which had almost swallowed them up; and it was a delicious sensation, a release that sent up their spirits.
"Stop!"
said M. Lenormand.
His head had knocked against something.
With arms outstretched, he pushed against the obstacle, which yielded at once.
It was the flap of a trap-door; and, when this trap-door was opened, he found himself in a cellar into which the light of a fine night filtered through an air-hole.
He threw back the flap and climbed the last treads.
Then a veil fell over his eyes.
Arms seized upon him.
He felt himself as it were wrapped in a sheet, in a sort of sack, and then fastened with cords.
"Now for the other one!"
said a voice.
The same operation must have been performed on Gourel; and the same voice said:
"If they call out, kill them at once.
Have you your dagger?"
"Yes."
"Come along. You two, take this one ... you two, that one... No light ... and no noise either... It would be a serious matter.
They've been searching the garden next door since this morning ... there are ten or fifteen of them knocking about... Go back to the house, Gertrude, and, if the least thing happens, telephone to me in Paris."
M. Lenormand felt that he was being lifted up and carried and, a moment after, that he was in the open air.
"Bring the cart nearer," said a voice.
M. Lenormand heard the sound of a horse and cart.
He was laid out on some boards.
Gourel was hoisted up beside him.
The horse started at a trot.
The drive lasted about half an hour.
"Halt!"
commanded the voice.
"Lift them out.
Here, driver, turn the cart so that the tail touches the parapet of the bridge... Good... No boats on the river?
Sure?
Then let's waste no time... Oh, have you fastened some stones to them?"
"Yes, paving-stones."
"Right away, then!
Commend your soul to God, M. Lenormand, and pray for me, Parbury-Ribeira, better known by the name of Baron Altenheim.
Are you ready?
All right?
Well, here's wishing you a pleasant journey, M.
Lenormand!"
M. Lenormand was placed on the parapet.
Someone gave him a push.
He felt himself falling into space and he still heard the voice chuckling:
"A pleasant journey!"
Ten seconds later it was Sergeant Gourel's turn.
The girls were playing in the garden, under the supervision of Mlle. Charlotte, Geneviève's new assistant. Mme.
Ernemont came out, distributed some cakes among them and then went back to the room which served as a drawing-room and parlor in one, sat down before a writing-desk and began to arrange her papers and account-books.
Suddenly, she felt the presence of a stranger in the room.
She turned round in alarm:
"You!"
she cried.
"Where have you come from?
How did you get in?"
"Hush!"
said Prince Sernine.
"Listen to me and do not let us waste a minute: Geneviève?"
"Calling on Mrs.
Kesselbach."
"When will she be here?"
"Not before an hour."
"Then I will let the brothers Doudeville come.
I have an appointment with them.
How is Geneviève?"
"Very well."
"How often has she seen Pierre Leduc since I went away, ten days ago?"
"Three times; and she is to meet him to-day at Mrs. Kesselbach's, to whom she introduced him, as you said she must. Only, I may as well tell you that I don't think much of this Pierre Leduc of yours.
Geneviève would do better to find some good fellow in her own class of life.
For instance, there's the schoolmaster."
"You're mad!
Geneviève marry a schoolmaster!"
"Oh, if you considered Geneviève's happiness first..."
"Shut up, Victoire. You're boring me with your cackle. I have no time to waste on sentiment. I'm playing a game of chess; and I move my men without troubling about what they think.
When I have won the game, I will go into the question whether the knight, Pierre Leduc, and the queen, Geneviève, have a heart or not."
She interrupted him:
"Did you hear?
A whistle..."
"It's the two Doudevilles.
Go and bring them in; and then leave us."
As soon as the two brothers were in the room, he questioned them with his usual precision:
"I know what the newspapers have said about the disappearance of Lenormand and Gourel.
Do you know any more?"
"No. The deputy-chief, M. Weber, has taken the case in hand. We have been searching the garden of the House of Retreat for the past week; and nobody is able to explain how they can have disappeared.
The whole force is in a flutter... No one has ever seen the like ... a chief of the detective-service disappearing, without leaving a trace behind him!"
"The two maids?"
"Gertrude has gone.
She is being looked for."
"Her sister Suzanne?"
"M. Weber and M. Formerie have questioned her.
There is nothing against her."
"Is that all you have to tell me?"
"Oh, no, there are other things, all the things which we did not tell the papers."
They then described the incidents that had marked M. Lenormand's last two days: the night visit of the two ruffians to Pierre Leduc's villa; next day, Ribeira's attempt to kidnap Geneviève and the chase through the Saint-Cucufa woods; old Steinweg's arrival, his examination at the detective-office in Mrs. Kesselbach's presence, his escape from the Palais...
"And no one knows these details except yourselves?"
"Dieuzy knows about the Steinweg incident: he told us of it."
"And they still trust you at the Prefecture of Police?"
"So much so that they employ us openly.
M. Weber swears by us."
"Come," said the prince, "all is not lost. If M. Lenormand has committed an imprudence that has cost him his life, as I suppose he did, at any rate he performed some good work first; and we have only to continue it.
The enemy has the start of us, but we will catch him up."
"It won't be an easy job, governor."
"Why not?
It is only a matter of finding old Steinweg again, for the answer to the riddle is in his hands."
"Yes, but where has Ribeira got old Steinweg tucked away?"
"At his own place, of course."
"Then we should have to know where Ribeira hangs out."
"Well, of course!"
He dismissed them and went to the House of Retreat.
Motor-cars were awaiting outside the door and two men were walking up and down, as though mounting guard.
In the garden, near Mrs. Kesselbach's house, he saw Geneviève sitting on a bench with Pierre Leduc and a thick-set gentleman wearing a single eye-glass. The three were talking and none of them saw him.
But several people came out of the house: M. Formerie, M. Weber, a magistrate's clerk, and two inspectors.
Geneviève went indoors and the gentleman with the eye-glass went up and spoke to the examining-magistrate and the deputy-chief of the detective-service and walked away with them slowly.
Sernine came beside the bench where Pierre Leduc was sitting and whispered:
"Don't move, Pierre Leduc; it's I."
"You!
... you!
..."
It was the third time that the young man saw Sernine since the awful night at Versailles; and each time it upset him.
"Tell me ... who is the fellow with the eye-glass?"
Pierre Leduc turned pale and jabbered.
Sernine pinched his arm:
"Answer me, confound it!
Who is he?"
"Baron Altenheim."
"Where does he come from?"
"He was a friend of Mr. Kesselbach's.
He arrived from Austria, six days ago, and placed himself at Mrs. Kesselbach's disposal."
The police authorities had, meanwhile, gone out of the garden; Baron Altenheim also.
The prince rose and, turning towards the Pavillon de l'Impératrice, continued:
"Has the baron asked you many questions?"
"Yes, a great many.
He is interested in my case.
He wants to help me find my family.
He appealed to my childhood memories."
"And what did you say?"
"Nothing, because I know nothing.
What memories have I?
You put me in another's place and I don't even know who that other is."
"No more do I!"
chuckled the prince.
"And that's just what makes your case so quaint."
"Oh, it's all very well for you to laugh ... you're always laughing!
...
But I'm beginning to have enough of it...
I'm mixed up in a heap of nasty matters ... to say nothing of the danger which I run in pretending to be somebody that I am not."
"What do you mean ... that you are not? You're quite as much a duke as I am a prince ... perhaps even more so... Besides, if you're not a duke, hurry up and become one, hang it all! Geneviève can't marry any one but a duke!
Look at her: isn't she worth selling your soul for?"
He did not even look at Leduc, not caring what he thought.
They had reached the house by this time; and Geneviève appeared at the foot of the steps, comely and smiling:
"So you have returned?"
she said to the prince.
"Ah, that's a good thing!
I am so glad... Do you want to see Dolores?"
After a moment, she showed him into Mrs. Kesselbach's room. The prince was taken aback. Dolores was paler still and thinner than on the day when he saw her last.
Lying on a sofa, wrapped up in white stuffs, she looked like one of those sick people who have ceased to struggle against death.
As for her, she had ceased to struggle against life, against the fate that was overwhelming her with its blows.
Sernine gazed at her with deep pity and with an emotion which he did not strive to conceal.
She thanked him for the sympathy which he showed her.
She also spoke of Baron Altenheim, in friendly terms.
"Did you know him before?"
he asked.
"Yes, by name, and through his intimacy with my husband."
"I have met an Altenheim who lives in the Rue de Rivoli.
Do you think it's the same?"
"Oh, no, this one lives in ... As a matter of fact, I don't quite know; he gave me his address, but I can't say that I remember it..."
After a few minutes' conversation, Sernine took his leave.
Geneviève was waiting for him in the hall:
"I want to speak to you," she said eagerly, "on a serious matter... Did you see him?"
"Whom?"
"Baron Altenheim...
But that's not his name ... or, at least, he has another...
I recognized him ... he does not know it."
She dragged him out of doors and walked on in great excitement.
"Calm yourself, Geneviève..."
"He's the man who tried to carry me off...
But for that poor M. Lenormand, I should have been done for... Come, you must know, for you know everything..."
"Then his real name is ..."
"Ribeira."
"Are you sure?"
"It was no use his changing his appearance, his accent, his manner: I knew him at once, by the horror with which he inspires me.
But I said nothing ... until you returned."
"You said nothing to Mrs. Kesselbach either?"
"No. She seemed so happy at meeting a friend of her husband's. But you will speak to her about it, will you not? You will protect her...
I don't know what he is preparing against her, against myself... Now that M. Lenormand is no longer there, he has nothing to fear, he does as he pleases.
Who can unmask him?"
"I can.
I will be responsible for everything.
But not a word to anybody."
They had reached the porter's lodge.
The gate was opened.
The prince said:
"Good-bye, Geneviève, and be quite easy in your mind.
I am there."
He shut the gate, turned round and gave a slight start.
Opposite him stood the man with the eye-glass, Baron Altenheim, with his head held well up, his broad shoulders, his powerful frame.
They looked at each other for two or three seconds, in silence.
The baron smiled.
Then the baron said:
"I was waiting for you, Lupin."
For all his self-mastery, Sernine felt a thrill pass over him. He had come to unmask his adversary; and his adversary had unmasked him at the first onset. And, at the same time, the adversary was accepting the contest boldly, brazenly, as though he felt sure of victory.
It was a swaggering thing to do and gave evidence of no small amount of pluck.
The two men, violently hostile one to the other, took each other's measure with their eyes.
"And what then?"
asked Sernine.
"What then?
Don't you think we have occasion for a meeting?"
"Why?"
"I want to talk to you."
"What day will suit you?"
"To-morrow.
Let us lunch together at a restaurant."
"Why not at your place?"
"You don't know my address."
"Yes, I do."
With a swift movement, the prince pulled out a newspaper protruding from Altenheim's pocket, a paper still in its addressed wrapper, and said:
"No.
29, Villa Dupont."
"Well played!"
said the other.
"Then we'll say, to-morrow, at my place."
"To-morrow, at your place.
At what time?"
"One o'clock."
"I shall be there.
Good-bye."
They were about to walk away.
Altenheim stopped:
"Oh, one word more, prince.
Bring a weapon with you."
"Why?"
"I keep four men-servants and you will be alone."
"I have my fists," said Sernine.
"We shall be on even terms."
He turned his back on him and then, calling him back:
"Oh, one word more, baron.
Engage four more servants."
"Why?"
"I have thought it over.
I shall bring my whip."
At one o'clock the next day, precisely, a horseman rode through the gate of the so-called Villa Dupont, a peaceful, countrified private road, the only entrance to which is in the Rue Pergolèse, close to the Avenue du Bois.
It is lined with gardens and handsome private houses; and, right at the end, it is closed by a sort of little park containing a large old house, behind which runs the Paris circular railway.
It was here, at No.
29, that Baron Altenheim lived.
Sernine flung the reins of his horse to a groom whom he had sent on ahead and said:
"Bring him back at half-past two."
He rang the bell. The garden-gate opened and he walked to the front-door steps, where he was awaited by two tall men in livery who ushered him into an immense, cold, stone hall, devoid of any ornament.
The door closed behind him with a heavy thud; and, great and indomitable as his courage was, he nevertheless underwent an unpleasant sensation at feeling himself alone, surrounded by enemies, in that isolated prison.
"Say Prince Sernine."
The drawing-room was near and he was shown straight in.
"Ah, there you are, my dear prince!"
said the baron, coming toward him.
"Well, will you believe - Dominique, lunch in twenty minutes.
Until then, don't let us be interrupted - will you believe, my dear prince, that I hardly expected to see you?"
"Oh, really?
Why?"
"Well, your declaration of war, this morning, is so plain that an interview becomes superfluous."
"My declaration of war?"
The baron unfolded a copy of the Grand Journal and pointed to a paragraph which ran as follows:
"We are authoritatively informed that M. Lenormand's disappearance has roused Arsène Lupin into taking action.
After a brief enquiry and following on his proposal to clear up the Kesselbach case, Arsène Lupin has decided that he will find M. Lenormand, alive or dead, and that he will deliver the author or authors of that heinous series of crimes to justice."
"This authoritative pronouncement comes from you, my dear prince, of course?"
"Yes, it comes from me."
"Therefore, I was right: it means war."
"Yes."
Altenheim gave Sernine a chair, sat down himself and said, in a conciliatory tone:
"Well, no, I cannot allow that.
It is impossible that two men like ourselves should fight and injure each other.
We have only to come to an explanation, to seek the means: you and I were made to understand each other."
"I think, on the contrary, that two men like ourselves are not made to understand each other."
The baron suppressed a movement of impatience and continued:
"Listen to me, Lupin... By the way, do you mind my calling you Lupin?"
"What shall I call you?
Altenheim, Ribeira, or Parbury?"
"Oho! I see that you are even better posted than I thought! ... Hang it all, but you're jolly smart! ... All the more reason why we should agree." And, bending toward him, "Listen, Lupin, and ponder my words well; I have weighed them carefully, every one.
Look here... We two are evenly matched... Does that make you smile?
You are wrong: it may be that you possess resources which I do not; but I have others of which you know nothing.
Moreover, as you are aware, I have few scruples, some skill and a capacity for changing my personality which an expert like yourself ought to appreciate.
In short, the two adversaries are each as good as the other.
But one question remains unanswered: why are we adversaries?
We are pursuing the same object, you will say?
And what then?
Do you know what will come of our rivalry?
Each of us will paralyze the efforts and destroy the work of the other; and we shall both miss our aim!
And for whose benefit?
Some Lenormand or other, a third rogue! ...
It's really too silly."
"It's really too silly, as you say," Sernine admitted.
"But there is a remedy."
"What is that?"
"For you to withdraw."
"Don't chaff.
I am serious.
The proposal which I am going to make is not one to be rejected without examination.
Here it is, in two words: let's be partners!"
"I say!"
"Of course, each of us will continue free where his own affairs are concerned.
But, for the business in question, let us combine our efforts.
Does that suit you?
Hand in hand and share alike."
"What do you bring?"
"I?"
"Yes, you know what I'm worth; I've delivered my proofs.
In the alliance which you are proposing, you know the figure, so to speak of my marriage-portion.
What's yours?"
"Steinweg."
"That's not much."
"It's immense.
Through Steinweg, we learn the truth about Pierre Leduc.
Through Steinweg, we get to know what the famous Kesselbach plan is all about."
Sernine burst out laughing:
"And you need me for that?"
"I don't understand."
"Come, old chap, your offer is childish.
You have Steinweg in your hands.
If you wish for my collaboration, it is because you have not succeeded in making him speak.
But for that fact, you would do without my services."
"Well, what of it?"
"I refuse."
The two men stood up to each other once more, violent and implacable.
"I refuse," said Sernine. "Lupin requires nobody, in order to act. I am one of those who walk alone. If you were my equal, as you pretend, the idea of a partnership would never have entered your head. The man who has the stature of a leader commands.
Union implies obedience.
I do not obey."
"You refuse?
You refuse?"
repeated Altenheim, turning pale under the insult.
"All that I can do for you, old chap, is to offer you a place in my band. You'll be a private soldier, to begin with. Under my orders, you shall see how a general wins a battle ... and how he pockets the booty, by himself and for himself.
Does that suit you ... Tommy?"
Altenheim was beside himself with fury.
He gnashed his teeth:
"You are making a mistake, Lupin," he mumbled, "you are making a mistake...
I don't want anybody either; and this business gives me no more difficulty than plenty of others which I have pulled off... What I said was said in order to effect our object more quickly and without inconveniencing each other."
"You're not inconveniencing me," said Lupin, scornfully.
"Look here!
If we don't combine, only one of us will succeed."
"That's good enough for me."
"And he will only succeed by passing over the other's body.
Are you prepared for that sort of duel, Lupin?
A duel to the death, do you understand?
...
The knife is a method which you despise; but suppose you received one, Lupin, right in the throat?"
"Aha!
So, when all is said, that's what you propose?"
"No, I am not very fond of shedding blood... Look at my fists: I strike ... and my man falls... I have special blows of my own... But the other one kills ... remember ... the little wound in the throat... Ah, Lupin, beware of him, beware of that one!
... He is terrible, he is implacable... Nothing stops him."
He spoke these words in a low voice and with such excitement that Sernine shuddered at the hideous thought of the unknown murderer:
"Baron," he sneered, "one would think you were afraid of your accomplice!"
"I am afraid for the others, for those who bar our road, for you, Lupin.
Accept, or you are lost.
I shall act myself, if necessary.
The goal is too near ...
I have my hand on it... Get out of my way, Lupin!"
He was all energy and exasperated will.
He spoke forcibly and so brutally that he seemed ready to strike his enemy then and there.
Sernine shrugged his shoulders:
"Lord, how hungry I am!"
he said, yawning.
"What a time to lunch at!"
The door opened.
"Lunch is served, sir," said the butler.
"Ah, that's good hearing!"
In the doorway, Altenheim caught Sernine by the arm and, disregarding the servant's presence:
"If you take my advice ... accept.
This is a serious moment in your life ... and you will do better, I swear to you, you will do better ... to accept..."
"Caviare!"
cried Sernine.
"Now, that's too sweet of you... You remembered that you were entertaining a Russian prince!"
They sat down facing each other, with the baron's greyhound, a large animal with long, silver hair, between them.
"Let me introduce Sirius, my most faithful friend."
"A fellow-countryman," said Sernine.
"I shall never forget the one which the Tsar was good enough to give me when I had the honor to save his life."
"Ah, you had that honor ... a terrorist conspiracy, no doubt?"
"Yes, a conspiracy got up by myself.
You must know, this dog - its name, by the way, was Sebastopol..."
The lunch continued merrily. Altenheim had recovered his good humor and the two men vied with each other in wit and politeness.
Sernine told anecdotes which the baron capped with others; and it was a succession of stories of hunting, sport and travel, in which the oldest names in Europe were constantly cropping up: Spanish grandees, English lords, Hungarian magyars, Austrian archdukes.
"Ah," said Sernine, "what a fine profession is ours!
It brings us into touch with all the best people.
Here, Sirius, a bit of this truffled chicken!"
The dog did not take his eyes off him, and snapped at everything that Sernine gave it.
"A glass of Chambertin, prince?"
"With pleasure, baron."
"I can recommend it.
It comes from King Leopold's cellar."
"A present?"
"Yes, a present I made myself."
"It's delicious... What a bouquet!
... With this pâté de foie gras, it's simply wonderful!
...
I must congratulate you, baron; you have a first-rate chef."
"My chef is a woman-cook, prince.
I bribed her with untold gold to leave Levraud, the socialist deputy.
I say, try this hot chocolate-ice; and let me call your special attention to the little dry cakes that go with it.
They're an invention of genius, those cakes."
"The shape is charming, in any case," said Sernine, helping himself.
"If they taste as good as they look...
Here, Sirius, you're sure to like this.
Locusta herself could not have done better."
He took one of the cakes and gave it to the dog.
Sirius swallowed it at a gulp, stood motionless for two or three seconds, as though dazed, then turned in a circle and fell to the floor dead.
Sernine started back from his chair, lest one of the footmen should fall upon him unawares.
Then he burst out laughing:
"Look here, baron, next time you want to poison one of your friends, try to steady your voice and to keep your hands from shaking...
Otherwise, people suspect you...
But I thought you disliked murder?"
"With the knife, yes," said Altenheim, quite unperturbed.
"But I have always had a wish to poison some one.
I wanted to see what it was like."
"By Jove, old chap, you choose your subjects well!
A Russian prince!"
He walked up to Altenheim and, in a confidential tone, said:
"Do you know what would have happened if you had succeeded, that is to say, if my friends had not seen me return at three o'clock at the latest?
Well, at half-past three the prefect of police would have known exactly all that there was to know about the so-called Baron Altenheim; and the said baron would have been copped before the day was out and clapped into jail."
"Pooh!"
said Altenheim.
"Prison one escapes from ... whereas one does not come back from the kingdom where I was sending you."
"True, but you would have to send me there first; and that's not so easy."
"I only wanted a mouthful of one of those cakes."
"Are you quite sure?"
"Try."
"One thing's certain, my lad: you haven't the stuff yet which great adventurers are made of; and I doubt if you'll ever have it, considering the sort of traps you lay for me.
A man who thinks himself worthy of leading the life which you and I have the honor to lead must also be fit to lead it, and, for that, must be prepared for every eventuality: he must even be prepared not to die if some ragamuffin or other tries to poison him... An undaunted soul in an unassailable body: that is the ideal which he must set before himself ... and attain.
Try away, old chap.
As for me, I am undaunted and unassailable.
Remember King Mithridates!"
He went back to his chair:
"Let's finish our lunch.
But as I like proving the virtues to which I lay claim, and as, on the other hand, I don't want to hurt your cook's feelings, just pass me that plate of cakes."
He took one of them, broke it in two and held out one half to the baron:
"Eat that!"
The other gave a movement of recoil.
"Funk!"
said Sernine.
And, before the wondering eyes of the baron and his satellites, he began to eat the first and then the second half of the cake, quietly, conscientiously, as a man eats a dainty of which he would hate to miss the smallest morsel.
They met again.
That same evening, Prince Sernine invited Baron Altenheim to dinner at the Cabaret Vatel, with a party consisting of a poet, a musician, a financier and two pretty actresses, members of the Théâtre Français.
The next day, they lunched together in the Bois and, at night, they met at the Opéra.
They saw each other every day for a week.
One would have thought that they could not do without each other and that they were united by a great friendship, built up of mutual confidence, sympathy and esteem.
They had a capital time, drinking good wine, smoking excellent cigars, and laughing like two madmen.
In reality, they were watching each other fiercely.
Mortal enemies, separated by a merciless hatred, each feeling sure of winning and longing for victory with an unbridled will, they waited for the propitious moment: Altenheim to do away with Sernine; and Sernine to hurl Altenheim into the pit which he was digging for him.
Each knew that the catastrophe could not be long delayed.
One or other of them must meet with his doom; and it was a question of hours, or, at most, of days.
It was an exciting tragedy, and one of which a man like Sernine was bound to relish the strange and powerful zest.
To know your adversary and to live by his side; to feel that death is waiting for you at the least false step, at the least act of thoughtlessness: what a joy, what a delight!
One evening, they were alone together in the garden of the Rue Cambon Club, to which Altenheim also belonged. It was the hour before dusk, in the month of June, at which men begin to dine before the members come in for the evening's card-play.
They were strolling round a little lawn, along which ran a wall lined with shrubs.
Beyond the shrubs was a small door.
Suddenly, while Altenheim was speaking, Sernine received the impression that his voice became less steady, that it was almost trembling.
He watched him out of the corner of his eye.
Altenheim had his hand in the pocket of his jacket; and Sernine saw that hand, through the cloth, clutch the handle of a dagger, hesitating, wavering, resolute and weak by turns.
O exquisite moment!
Was he going to strike?
Which would gain the day: the timid instinct that dare not, or the conscious will, intense upon the act of killing?
His chest flung out, his arms behind his back, Sernine waited, with alternate thrills of pleasure and of pain.
The baron had ceased talking; and they now walked on in silence, side by side.
"Well, why don't you strike?" cried the prince, impatiently. He had stopped and, turning to his companion: "Strike!" he said. "This is the time or never. There is no one to see you.
You can slip out through that little door; the key happens to be hanging on the wall; and good-bye, baron ... unseen and unknown! ...
But, of course, all this was arranged ... you brought me here... And you're hesitating!
Why on earth don't you strike?"
He looked him straight in the eyes.
The other was livid, quivering with impotent strength.
"You milksop!" Sernine sneered. "I shall never make anything of you. Shall I tell you the truth? Well, you're afraid of me. Yes, old chap, you never feel quite sure what may happen to you when you're face to face with me.
You want to act, whereas it's my acts, my possible acts that govern the situation.
No, it's quite clear that you're not the man yet to put out my star!"
He had not finished speaking when he felt himself seized round the throat and dragged backward. Some one hiding in the shrubbery, near the little door, had caught him by the head. He saw a hand raised, armed with a knife with a gleaming blade.
The hand fell; the point of the knife caught him right in the throat.
At the same moment Altenheim sprang upon him to finish him off; and they rolled over into the flower-borders. It was a matter of twenty or thirty seconds at most. Powerful and experienced wrestler as he was, Altenheim yielded almost immediately, uttering a cry of pain.
Sernine rose and ran to the little door, which had just closed upon a dark form.
It was too late.
He heard the key turn in the lock.
He was unable to open it.
"Ah, you scoundrel!"
he said.
"The day on which I catch you will be the day on which I shed my first blood!
That I swear to God!
..."
He went back, stooped and picked up the pieces of the knife, which had broken as it struck him.
Altenheim was beginning to move.
Sernine asked:
"Well, baron, feeling better? You didn't know that blow, eh? It's what I call the direct blow in the solar plexus; that is to say, it snuffs out your vital sun like a candle. It's clean, quick, painless ... and infallible. Whereas a blow with a dagger ... ? Pooh!
A man has only to wear a little steel-wove gorget, as I do, and he can set the whole world at defiance, especially your little pal in black, seeing that he always strikes at the throat, the silly monster! ...
Here, look at his favorite plaything ... smashed to atoms!"
He offered him his hand:
"Come, get up, baron.
You shall dine with me.
And do please remember the secret of my superiority: an undaunted soul in an unassailable body."
He went back to the club rooms, reserved a table for two, sat down on a sofa, and while waiting for dinner, soliloquized, under his breath:
"It's certainly an amusing game, but it's becoming dangerous. I must get it over ... otherwise those beggars will send me to Paradise earlier than I want to go.
The nuisance is that I can't do anything before I find old Steinweg, for, when all is said, old Steinweg is the only interesting factor in the whole business; and my one reason for sticking to the baron is that I keep on hoping to pick up some clue or other.
What the devil have they done with him?
Altenheim is in daily communication with him: that is beyond a doubt; it is equally beyond a doubt that he is doing his utmost to drag out of him what he knows about the Kesselbach scheme.
But where does he see him?
Where has he got him shut up?
With friends?
In his own house, at 29, Villa Dupont?"
He reflected for some time, then lit a cigarette, took three puffs at it and threw it away. This was evidently a signal, for two young men came and sat down beside him. He did not seem to know them, but he conversed with them by stealth.
It was the brothers Doudeville, got up that day like men of fashion.
"What is it, governor?"
"Take six of our men, go to 29, Villa Dupont and make your way in."
"The devil!
How?"
"In the name of the law.
Are you not detective-inspectors?
A search..."
"But we haven't the right..."
"Take it."
"And the servants?
If they resist?"
"There are only four of them."
"If they call out?"
"They won't call out."
"If Altenheim returns?"
"He won't return before ten o'clock.
I'll see to it.
That gives you two hours and a half, which is more than you require to explore the house from top to bottom.
If you find old Steinweg, come and tell me."
Baron Altenheim came up.
Sernine went to meet him:
"Let's have some dinner, shall we?
That little incident in the garden has made me feel hungry.
By the way, my dear baron, I have a few bits of advice to give you..."
They sat down to table.
After dinner, Sernine suggested a game of billiards.
Altenheim accepted.
When the game was over, they went to the baccarat-room.
The croupier was just shouting:
"There are fifty louis in the bank.
Any bids?"
"A hundred louis," said Altenheim.
Sernine looked at his watch.
Ten o'clock.
The Doudevilles had not returned.
The search, therefore, had been fruitless.
"Banco," he said.
Altenheim sat down and dealt the cards:
"I give."
"No."
"Seven."
"Six.
I lose," said Sernine.
"Shall I double the stakes?"
"Very well," said the baron.
He dealt out the cards.
"Eight," said Sernine.
"Nine," said the baron, laying his cards down.
Sernine turned on his heels, muttering:
"That costs me three hundred louis, but I don't mind; it fixes him here."
Ten minutes later his motor set him down in front of 29, Villa Dupont; and he found the Doudevilles and their men collected in the hall:
"Have you hunted out the old boy?"
"No."
"Dash it!
But he must be somewhere or other.
Where are the four servants?"
"Over there, in the pantry, tied up, with the cook as well."
"Good.
I would as soon they did not see me.
Go all you others.
Jean, stay outside and keep watch: Jacques, show me over the house."
He quickly ran through the cellar, the ground floor, the first and second floors and the attic. He practically stopped nowhere, knowing that he would not discover in a few minutes what his men had not been able to discover in three hours.
But he carefully noted the shape and the arrangement of the rooms, and looked for some little detail which would put him on the scent.
When he had finished, he returned to a bedroom which Doudeville had told him was Altenheim's, and examined it attentively:
"This will do," he said, raising a curtain that concealed a dark closet, full of clothes.
"From here I can see the whole of the room."
"But if the baron searches the house?"
"Why should he?"
"He will know that we have been here, through his servants."
"Yes, but he will never dream that one of us is putting up here for the night.
He will think that the attempt failed, that is all, so I shall stay."
"And how will you get out?"
"Oh, that's asking me more than I can tell you!
The great thing was to get in.
Here I am, and here I stay.
Go, Doudeville, and shut the doors as you go."
He sat down on a little box at the back of the cupboard.
Four rows of hanging clothes protected him.
Except in the case of a close investigation, he was evidently quite safe.
Two hours passed.
He heard the dull sound of a horse's hoofs and the tinkling of a collar-bell.
A carriage stopped, the front door slammed and almost immediately he heard voices, exclamations, a regular outcry that increased, probably, as each of the prisoners was released from his gag.
"They are explaining the thing to him," he thought. "The baron must be in a tearing rage. He now understands the reason for my conduct at the club to-night and sees that I have dished him nicely... Dished?
That depends... After all, I haven't got Steinweg yet... That is the first thing that he will want to know: did they get Steinweg?
To find this out, he will go straight to the hiding-place.
If he goes up, it means that the hiding-place is upstairs.
If he goes down, then it is in the basement."
He listened.
The sound of voices continued in the rooms on the ground floor, but it did not seem as if any one were moving.
Altenheim must be cross-examining his confederates.
It was half an hour before Sernine heard steps mounting the staircase.
"Then it must be upstairs," he said to himself.
"But why did they wait so long?"
"Go to bed, all of you," said Altenheim's voice.
The baron entered his room with one of his men and shut the door:
"And I am going to bed, too, Dominique.
We should be no further if we sat arguing all night."
"My opinion is," said the other, "that he came to fetch Steinweg."
"That is my opinion, too; and that's why I'm really enjoying myself, seeing that Steinweg isn't here."
"But where is he, after all?
What have you done with him?"
"That's my secret; and you know I keep my secrets to myself.
All that I can tell you is that he is in safe keeping, and that he won't get out before he has spoken."
"So the prince is sold?"
"Sold is the word.
And he has had to fork out to attain this fine result!
Oh, I've had a good time to-night!
... Poor prince!"
"For all that," said the other, "we shall have to get rid of him."
"Make your mind easy, old man; that won't take long.
Before a week's out you shall have a present of a pocket-book made out of Lupin-skin.
But let me go to bed now.
I'm dropping with sleep."
There was a sound of the door closing.
Then Sernine heard the baron push the bolt, empty his pockets, wind up his watch and undress.
He seemed in a gay mood, whistling and singing, and even talking aloud:
"Yes, a Lupin-skin pocket-book ... in less than a week ... in less than four days!
...
Otherwise he'll eat us up, the bully!
... No matter, he missed his shot to-night... His calculation was right enough, though ... Steinweg was bound to be here... Only, there you are!
..."
He got into bed and at once switched off the light.
Sernine had come forward as far as the dividing curtain, which he now lifted slightly, and he saw the vague light of the night filtering through the windows, leaving the bed in profound darkness.
He hesitated.
Should he leap out upon the baron, take him by the throat and obtain from him by force and threats what he had not been able to obtain by craft?
Absurd?
Altenheim would never allow himself to be intimidated.
"I say, he's snoring now," muttered Sernine.
"Well, I'm off.
At the worst, I shall have wasted a night."
He did not go.
He felt that it would be impossible for him to go, that he must wait, that chance might yet serve his turn.
With infinite precautions, he took four or five coats and great-coats from their hooks, laid them on the floor, made himself comfortable and, with his back to the wall, went peacefully to sleep.
The baron was not an early riser.
A clock outside was striking nine when he got out of bed and rang for his servant.
He read the letters which his man brought him, splashed about in his tub, dressed without saying a word and sat down to his table to write, while Dominique was carefully hanging up the clothes of the previous day in the cupboard and Sernine asking himself, with his fists ready to strike:
"I wonder if I shall have to stave in this fellow's solar plexus?"
At ten o'clock the baron was ready:
"Leave me," said he to the servant.
"There's just this waistcoat..."
"Leave me, I say.
Come back when I ring ... not before."
He shut the door himself, like a man who does not trust others, went to a table on which a telephone was standing and took down the receiver:
"Hullo!
...
Put me on to Garches, please, mademoiselle...
Very well, I'll wait till you ring me up..."
He sat down to the instrument.
The telephone-bell rang.
"Hullo!"
said Altenheim.
"Is that Garches?
...
Yes, that's right... Give me number 38, please, mademoiselle..."
A few seconds later, in a lower voice, as low and as distinct as he could make it, he began:
"Are you 38? ... It's I speaking; no useless words... Yesterday? ... Yes, you missed him in the garden... Another time, of course; but the thing's becoming urgent... He had the house searched last night... I'll tell you about it... Found nothing, of course... What? ... Hullo!
... No, old Steinweg refuses to speak... Threats, promises, nothing's any good... Hullo! ...
Yes, of course, he sees that we can do nothing... We know just a part of the Kesselbach scheme and of the story of Pierre Leduc...
He's the only one who has the answer to the riddle... Oh, he'll speak all right; that I'll answer for ... this very night, too ... If not ... What? ...
Well, what can we do?
Anything rather than let him escape!
Do you want the prince to bag him from us?
As for the prince, we shall have to cook his goose in three days from now... You have an idea? ...
Yes, that's a good idea... Oh, oh, excellent!
I'll see to it... When shall we meet?
Will Tuesday do?
Right you are.
I'll come on Tuesday ... at two o'clock... Good-bye."
He replaced the receiver and went out.
A few hours later, while the servants were at lunch, Prince Sernine strolled quietly out of the Villa Dupont, feeling rather faint in the head and weak in the knees, and, while making for the nearest restaurant, he thus summed up the situation:
"So, on Tuesday next, Altenheim and the Palace Hotel murderer have an appointment at Garches, in a house with the telephone number 38. On Tuesday, therefore, I shall hand over the two criminals to the police and set M. Lenormand at liberty.
In the evening, it will be old Steinweg's turn; and I shall learn, at last, whether Pierre Leduc is the son of a pork-butcher or not and whether he will make a suitable husband for Geneviève.
So be it!"
At eleven o'clock on Tuesday morning Valenglay, the prime minister, sent for the prefect of police and M. Weber, the deputy-chief of the detective-service, and showed them an express letter which he had just received:
"Monsieur le Président du Conseil,
"Knowing the interest which you take in M. Lenormand, I am writing to inform you of certain facts which chance has revealed to me.
"M. Lenormand is locked up in the cellars of the Villa des Glycines at Garches, near the House of Retreat.
"The ruffians of the Palace Hotel have resolved to murder him at two o'clock to-day.
"If the police require my assistance, they will find me at half-past one in the garden of the House of Retreat, or at the garden-house occupied by Mrs. Kesselbach, whose friend I have the honor to be.
"I am, Monsieur le Président du Conseil,
"Your obedient servant,
"Prince Sernine."
"This is an exceedingly grave matter, my dear M. Weber," said Valenglay.
"I may add that we can have every confidence in the accuracy of Prince Sernine's statements.
I have often met him at dinner.
He is a serious, intelligent man..."
"Will you allow me, Monsieur le Président," asked the deputy-chief detective, "to show you another letter which I also received this morning?"
"About the same case?"
"Yes."
"Let me see it."
He took the letter and read:
"Sir,
"This is to inform you that Prince Paul Sernine, who calls himself Mrs. Kesselbach's friend, is really Arsène Lupin.
"One proof will be sufficient: Paul Sernine is the anagram of Arsène Lupin.
Not a letter more, not a letter less.
"L. M."
And M. Weber added, while Valenglay stood amazed:
"This time, our friend Lupin has found an adversary who is a match for him.
While he denounces the other, the other betrays him to us.
And the fox is caught in the trap."
"What do you propose to do?"
A quarter past twelve, in a restaurant near the Madeleine.
The prince is at lunch.
Two young men sit down at the next table.
He bows to them and begins to speak to them, as to friends whom he has met by chance.
"Are you going on the expedition, eh?"
"Yes."
"How many men altogether?"
"Six, I think.
Each goes down by himself.
We're to meet M. Weber at a quarter to two, near the House of Retreat."
"Very well, I shall be there."
"What?"
"Am I not leading the expedition?
And isn't it my business to find M. Lenormand, seeing that I've announced it publicly?"
"Then you believe that M. Lenormand is not dead, governor?"
"I'm sure of it."
"Do you know anything?"
"Yes, since yesterday I know for certain that Altenheim and his gang took M. Lenormand and Gourel to the bridge at Bougival and heaved them overboard.
Gourel sank, but M. Lenormand managed to save himself.
I shall furnish all the necessary proofs when the time comes."
"But, then, if he's alive, why doesn't he show himself?"
"Because he's not free."
"Is what you said true, then?
Is he in the cellars of the Villa des Glycines?"
"I have every reason to think so."
"But how do you know?
... What clue?
..."
"That's my secret.
I can tell you one thing: the revelation will be - what shall I say - sensational.
Have you finished?"
"Yes."
"My car is behind the Madeleine.
Join me there."
At Garches, Sernine sent the motor away, and they walked to the path that led to Geneviève's school.
There he stopped:
"Listen to me, lads. This is of the highest importance. You will ring at the House of Retreat. As inspectors, you have your right of entry, have you not? You will then go to the Pavillon Hortense, the empty one.
There you will run down to the basement and you will find an old shutter, which you have only to lift to see the opening of a tunnel which I discovered lately and which forms a direct communication with the Villa des Glycines.
It was by means of this that Gertrude and Baron Altenheim used to meet.
And it was this way that M. Lenormand passed, only to end by falling into the hands of his enemies."
"You think so, governor?"
"Yes, I think so.
And now the point is this: you must go and make sure that the tunnel is exactly in the condition in which I left it last night; that the two doors which bar it are open; and that there is still, in a hole near the second door, a parcel wrapped in a piece of black cloth which I put there myself."
"Are we to undo the parcel?"
"No, that's not necessary.
It's a change of clothes.
Go; and don't let yourselves be seen more than you can help.
I will wait for you."
Ten minutes later, they were back:
"The two doors are open," said one of the Doudevilles.
"And the black cloth parcel?"
"In its place near the second door."
"Capital! It is twenty-five past one. Weber will be arriving with his champions. They are to watch the villa. They will surround it as soon as Altenheim is inside.
I have arranged with Weber that I shall ring the bell; the door will be opened; and I shall have my foot inside the citadel.
Once there, I have my plan.
Come, I've an idea that we shall see some fun."
And Sernine, after dismissing them, walked down the path to the school, soliloquizing as he went:
"All bodes well. The battle will be fought on the ground chosen by myself. I am bound to win. I shall get rid of my two adversaries and I shall find myself alone engaged in the Kesselbach case ... alone, with two whacking trump-cards: Pierre Leduc and Steinweg...
Besides the king ... that is to say, Bibi.
Only, there's one thing: what is Altenheim up to?
Obviously, he has a plan of attack of his own.
On which side does he mean to attack me?
And how does it come that he has not attacked me yet?
It's rather startling.
Can he have denounced me to the police?"
He went along the little playground of the school.
The pupils were at their lessons.
He knocked at the door.
"Ah, is that you?"
said Mme.
Ernemont, opening the door.
"So you have left Geneviève in Paris?"
"For me to do that, Geneviève would have to be in Paris," he replied.
"So she has been, seeing that you sent for her."
"What's that?"
he exclaimed catching hold of her arm.
"Why, you know better than I!"
"I know nothing...
I know nothing...
Speak!
..."
"Didn't you write to Geneviève to meet you at the Gare Saint-Lazare?"
"And did she go?"
"Why, of course... You were to lunch together at the Hôtel Ritz."
"The letter... Show me the letter."
She went to fetch it and gave it to him.
"But, wretched woman, couldn't you see that it was a forgery? The handwriting is a good imitation ... but it's a forgery... Any one can see that." He pressed his clenched hands to his temples with rage. "That's the move I was wondering about. Oh, the dirty scoundrel!
He's attacking me through her ... But how does he know?
No, he does not know... He's tried it on twice now ... and it's because of Geneviève, because he's taken a fancy to her... Oh, not that!
Never!
Listen, Victoire, are you sure that she doesn't love him?
... Oh, I'm losing my head! ...
Wait ... wait! ...
I must think ... this isn't the moment..."
He looked at his watch:
"Twenty-five minutes to two...
I have time...
Idiot that I am!
Time to do what?
How do I know where she is?"
He walked up and down like a madman; and his old nurse seemed astounded at seeing him so excited, with so little control of himself:
"After all," she said, "there is nothing to prove that she did not suspect the trap at the last moment..."
"Where could she be?"
"I don't know ... perhaps at Mrs.
Kesselbach's."
"That's true ... that's true... You're right," he cried, filled with sudden hope.
And he set out at a run for the House of Retreat.
On the way, near the gate, he met the brothers Doudeville, who were entering the porter's lodge. The lodge looked out on the road; and this enabled them to watch the approaches to the Villa des Glycines.
Without stopping, he went straight to the Pavillon de l'Impératrice, called Suzanne and told her to take him to Mrs. Kesselbach.
"Geneviève?"
he asked.
"Geneviève?"
"Yes; hasn't she been here?"
"No, not for several days..."
"But she is to come, is she not?"
"Do you think so?"
"Why, I'm certain of it.
Where do you think she is?
Can you remember?
..."
"It's no use my trying.
I assure you that Geneviève and I had made no arrangement to see each other."
And, suddenly alarmed: "But you're not anxious, are you?
Has anything happened to Geneviève?"
"No, nothing."
He had already left the room.
An idea had occurred to him.
Suppose Altenheim were not at the Villa des Glycines?
Suppose the hour of the meeting had been changed!
"I must see him," he said to himself.
"I must, at all costs."
And he ran along with a disordered air, indifferent to everything.
But, in front of the lodge, he at once recovered his composure: he had caught sight of the deputy-chief of the detective-service talking to the brothers Doudeville in the garden.
Had he commanded his usual acute discernment, he would have perceived the little start which M. Weber gave as he approached; but he saw nothing:
"M. Weber, I believe?"
he asked.
"Yes... To whom have I the honor ...
?"
"Prince Sernine."
"Ah, very good!
Monsieur le Préfet de Police has told me of the great service which you are doing us, monsieur."
"That service will not be complete until I have handed the ruffians over to you."
"That won't take long.
I believe that one of those ruffians has just gone in; a powerful-looking man, with a swarthy complexion..."
"Yes, that's Baron Altenheim.
Are your men here, M.
Weber?"
"Yes, concealed along the road, at two hundred yards from this."
"Well, M. Weber, it seems to me that you might collect them and bring them to this lodge.
From here we will go to the villa.
As Baron Altenheim knows me, I presume they will open the door to me and I will go in ... with you."
"It is an excellent plan," said M. Weber.
"I shall come back at once."
He left the garden and walked down the road, in the opposite direction to the Villa des Glycines.
Sernine quickly took one of the brothers Doudeville by the arm:
"Run after him, Jacques ... keep him engaged ... long enough for me to get inside the Glycines... And then delay the attack as long as you can... Invent pretexts... I shall want ten minutes... Let the villa be surrounded ... but not entered.
And you, Jean, go and post yourself in the Pavillon Hortense, at the entrance to the underground passage.
If the baron tries to go out that way, break his head."
The Doudevilles moved away, as ordered.
The prince slipped out and ran to a tall gate, barred with iron, which was the entrance to the Glycines.
Should he ring?
...
There was no one in sight.
With one bound, he leapt upon the gate, placing his foot on the lock; and, hanging on to the bars, getting a purchase with his knees and hoisting himself up with his wrists, he managed, at the risk of falling on the sharp points of the bars, to climb over the gate and jump down.
He found a paved courtyard, which he crossed briskly, and mounted the steps of a pillared peristyle, on which the windows looked out. These were all closed to the very top, with full shutters.
As he stood thinking how he should make his way into the house, the door was half opened, with a noise of iron that reminded him of the door in the Villa Dupont, and Altenheim appeared:
"I say, prince, is that the way you trespass on private property?
I shall be forced to call in the gendarmes, my dear fellow!"
Sernine caught him by the throat and, throwing him down on a bench:
"Geneviève?
... Where is Geneviève?
If you don't tell me what you've done with her, you villain..."
"Please observe," stammered the baron, "that you are making it impossible for me to speak."
Sernine released his hold of him:
"To the point!
... And look sharp!
... Answer...
Geneviève?"
"There is one thing," replied the baron, "which is much more urgent, especially where fellows like you and me are concerned, and that is to feel one's self at home..."
And he carefully closed the front door, which he barricaded with bolts.
Then, leading Sernine to the adjoining drawing-room, a room without furniture or curtains, he said:
"Now I'm your man.
What can I do for you, prince?"
"Geneviève?"
"She is in perfect health."
"Ah, so you confess ...
?"
"Of course!
I may even tell you that your imprudence in this respect surprised me.
Why didn't you take a few precautions?
It was inevitable..."
"Enough!
Where is she?"
"You are not very polite."
"Where is she?"
"Between four walls, free..."
"Free?"
"Yes, free to go from one wall to another."
"Where?
Where?"
"Come, prince, do you think I should be fool enough to tell you the secret by which I hold you?
You love the little girl ..."
"Hold your tongue!"
shouted Sernine, beside himself.
"I forbid you..."
"What next?
Is there anything to be ashamed of?
I love her myself and I have risked ..."
He did not complete his sentence, frightened by the terrific anger of Sernine, a restrained, dumb anger that distorted the prince's features.
They looked at each other for a long time, each of them seeking for the adversary's weak point.
At last, Sernine stepped forward and, speaking very distinctly, like a man who is threatening rather than proposing a compact:
"Listen to me," he said.
"You remember the offer of partnership which you made me?
The Kesselbach business for the two of us ... we were to act together ... we were to share the profits...
I refused... To-day, I accept..."
"Too late."
"Wait!
I accept more than that: I give the whole business up...
I shall take no further part in it... You shall have it all...
If necessary, I'll help you."
"What is the condition?"
"Tell me where Geneviève is."
The baron shrugged his shoulders:
"You're driveling, Lupin.
I'm sorry for you ... at your age..."
There was a fresh silence between the two enemies, a terrible silence.
Then the baron sneered:
"All the same, it's a holy joy to see you like that, sniveling and begging.
I say, it seems to me that the private soldier is giving his general a sound beating!"
"You ass!"
muttered Sernine.
"Prince, I shall send you my seconds this evening ... if you are still in this world."
"You ass!"
repeated Sernine, with infinite contempt.
"You would rather settle the matter here and now?
As you please, prince: your last hour has struck.
You can commend your soul to God.
You smile!
That's a mistake.
I have one immense advantage over you!
I kill ... when it's necessary..."
"You ass!" said Sernine once more. He took out his watch. "It is two o'clock, baron. You have only a few minutes left.
At five past two, ten past at the very latest, M. Weber and half-a-dozen sturdy men, without a scruple amongst them, will lay hands on you... Don't you smile, either.
The outlet on which you're reckoning is discovered; I know it: it is guarded.
So you are thoroughly caught.
It means the scaffold, old chap."
Altenheim turned livid.
He stammered:
"You did this?
... You have had the infamy ..."
"The house is surrounded.
The assault is at hand.
Speak ... and I will save you."
"How?"
"The men watching the outlet in the Pavillon Hortense belong to me.
I have only to give you a word for them and you are saved.
Speak!"
Altenheim reflected for a few seconds and seemed to hesitate; but, suddenly, resolutely, declared:
"This is all bluff.
You would never have been simple enough to rush into the lion's mouth."
"You're forgetting Geneviève.
But for her, do you think I should be here?
Speak!"
"No."
"Very well.
Let us wait," said Sernine.
"A cigarette?"
"Thank you."
A few seconds passed.
"Do you hear?"
asked Sernine.
"Yes ... yes ..." said Altenheim, rising.
Blows rang against the gate.
Sernine observed:
"Not even the usual summons ... no preliminaries...
Your mind is still made up?"
"More so than ever."
"You know that, with the tools they carry, they won't take long?"
"If they were inside this room I should still refuse."
The gate yielded.
They heard it creak on its hinges.
"To allow one's self to get nabbed," said Sernine, "is admissible.
But to hold out one's own hands to the handcuffs is too silly.
Come, don't be obstinate.
Speak ... and bolt!"
"And you?"
"I shall remain.
What have I to be afraid of?"
"Look!"
The baron pointed to a chink between the shutters.
Sernine put his eye to it and jumped back with a start:
"Oh, you scoundrel, so you have denounced me, too!
It's not ten men that Weber's bringing, but fifty men, a hundred, two hundred..."
The baron laughed open-heartedly:
"And, if there are so many of them, it's because they're after Lupin; that's obvious!
Half-a-dozen would have been enough for me."
"You informed the police?"
"Yes."
"What proof did you give?"
"Your name: Paul Sernine, that is to say, Arsène Lupin."
"And you found that out all by yourself, did you?
... A thing which nobody else thought of?
...
Nonsense!
It was the other one.
Admit it!"
He looked out through the chink. Swarms of policemen were spreading round the villa; and the blows were now sounding on the door. He must, however, think of one of two things: either his escape, or else the execution of the plan which he had contrived.
But to go away, even for a moment, meant leaving Altenheim; and who could guarantee that the baron had not another outlet at his disposal to escape by?
This thought paralyzed Sernine.
The baron free!
The baron at liberty to go back to Geneviève and torture her and make her subservient to his odious love!
Thwarted in his designs, obliged to improvise a new plan on the very second, while subordinating everything to the danger which Geneviève was running, Sernine passed through a moment of cruel indecision.
With his eyes fixed on the baron's eyes, he would have liked to tear his secret from him and to go away; and he no longer even tried to convince him, so useless did all words seem to him.
And, while pursuing his own thoughts, he asked himself what the baron's thoughts could be, what his weapons, what his hope of safety?
The hall-door, though strongly bolted, though sheeted with iron, was beginning to give way.
The two men stood behind that door, motionless.
The sound of voices, the sense of words reached them.
"You seem very sure of yourself," said Sernine.
"I should think so!"
cried the other, suddenly tripping him to the floor and running away.
Sernine sprang up at once, dived through a little door under the staircase, through which Altenheim had disappeared, and ran down the stone steps to the basement...
A passage led to a large, low, almost pitch-dark room, where he found the baron on his knees, lifting the flap of a trap-door.
"Idiot!" shouted Sernine, flinging himself upon him. "You know that you will find my men at the end of this tunnel and that they have orders to kill you like a dog...
Unless ... unless you have an outlet that joins on to this... Ah, there, of course, I've guessed it! ...
And you imagine ..."
The fight was a desperate one.
Altenheim, a real colossus, endowed with exceptional muscular force, had caught his adversary round the arms and body and was pressing him against his own chest, numbing his arms and trying to smother him.
"Of course ... of course," Sernine panted, with difficulty, "of course ... that's well thought out... As long as I can't use my arms to break some part of you, you will have the advantage ... Only ... can you ...
?"
He gave a shudder. The trap-door, which had closed again and on the flap of which they were bearing down with all their weight, the trap-door seemed to move beneath them.
He felt the efforts that were being made to raise it; and the baron must have felt them too, for he desperately tried to shift the ground of the contest so that the trap-door might open.
"It's 'the other one'!"
thought Sernine, with the sort of unreasoning terror which that mysterious being caused him.
"It's the other one...
If he gets through, I'm done for."
By dint of imperceptible movements, Altenheim had succeeded in shifting his own position; and he tried to drag his adversary after him.
But Sernine clung with his legs to the baron's legs and, at the same time, very gradually, tried to release one of his hands.
Above their heads great blows resounded, like the blows of a battering-ram...
"I have five minutes," thought Sernine.
"In one minute this fellow will have to ..." Then, speaking aloud, "Look out, old chap.
Stand tight!"
He brought his two knees together with incredible force.
The baron yelled, with a twisted thigh.
Then Sernine, taking advantage of his adversary's pain, made an effort, freed his right arm and seized him by the throat:
"That's capital! ... We shall be more comfortable like this... No, it's not worth while getting out your knife... If you do, I'll wring your neck like a chicken's. You see, I'm polite and considerate...
I'm not pressing too hard ... just enough to keep you from even wanting to kick about."
While speaking he took from his pocket a very thin cord and, with one hand, with extreme skill, fastened his wrists.
For that matter, the baron, now at his last gasp, offered not the least resistance.
With a few accurate movements, Sernine tied him up firmly:
"How well you're behaving!
What a good thing!
I should hardly know you.
Here, in case you were thinking of escaping, I have a roll of wire that will finish off my little work...
The wrists first... Now the ankles... That's it!
... By Jove, how nice you look!"
The baron had gradually come to himself again.
He spluttered:
"If you give me up, Geneviève will die."
"Really?
... And how?
...
Explain yourself."
"She is locked up.
No one knows where she is.
If I'm put away, she will die of starvation."
Sernine shuddered.
He retorted:
"Yes, but you will speak."
"Never!"
"Yes, you will speak. Not now; it's too late. But to-night." He bent down over him and, whispering in his ear, said, "Listen, Altenheim, and understand what I say. You'll be caught presently. To-night, you'll sleep at the Dépôt. That is fatal, irrevocable.
I myself can do nothing to prevent it now.
And, to-morrow, they will take you to the Santé; and later, you know where... Well, I'm giving you one more chance of safety.
To-night, you understand, I shall come to your cell, at the Dépôt, and you shall tell me where Geneviève is.
Two hours later, if you have told the truth, you shall be free.
If not ... it means that you don't attach much value to your head."
The other made no reply.
Sernine stood up and listened.
There was a great crash overhead.
The entrance-door yielded.
Footsteps beat the flags of the hall and the floor of the drawing room.
M. Weber and his men were searching.
"Good-bye, baron.
Think it over until this evening.
The prison-cell is a good counsellor."
He pushed his prisoner aside, so as to uncover the trap-door, and lifted it.
As he expected, there was no longer any one below on the steps of the staircase.
He went down, taking care to leave the trap-door open behind him, as though he meant to come back.
There were twenty steps, at the bottom of which began the passage through which M. Lenormand and Gourel had come in the opposite direction.
He entered it and gave an exclamation.
He thought he felt somebody's presence there.
He lit his pocket-lantern.
The passage was empty.
Then he cocked his revolver and said aloud:
"All right...
I'm going to fire."
No reply.
Not a sound.
"It's an illusion, no doubt," he thought. "That creature is becoming an obsession... Come, if I want to pull off my stroke and win the game, I must hurry... The hole in which I hid the parcel of clothes is not far off.
I shall take the parcel ... and the trick is done... And what a trick!
One of Lupin's best! ..."
He came to a door that stood open and at once stopped.
To the right was an excavation, the one which M. Lenormand had made to escape from the rising water.
He stooped and threw his light into the opening:
"Oh!"
he said, with a start.
"No, it's not possible ... Doudeville must have pushed the parcel farther along."
But, search and pry into the darkness as he might, the parcel was gone; and he had no doubt but that it was once more the mysterious being who had taken it.
"What a pity! The thing was so neatly arranged!
The adventure would have resumed its natural course, and I should have achieved my aim with greater certainty... As it is, I must push along as fast as I can... Doudeville is at the Pavillon Hortense... My retreat is insured... No more nonsense...
I must hurry and set things straight again, if I can... And we'll attend to 'him' afterward... Oh, he'd better keep clear of my claws, that one!"
But an exclamation of stupor escaped his lips; he had come to the other door; and this door, the last before the garden-house, was shut.
He flung himself upon it.
What was the good?
What could he do?
"This time," he muttered, "I'm badly done!"
And, seized with a sort of lassitude, he sat down. He had a sense of his weakness in the face of the mysterious being. Altenheim hardly counted.
But the other, that person of darkness and silence, the other loomed up before him, upset all his plans and exhausted him with his cunning and infernal attacks.
He was beaten.
Weber would find him there, like an animal run to earth, at the bottom of his cave.
"Ah, no!" he cried, springing up with a bound. "No! If there were only myself, well and good! ... But there is Geneviève, Geneviève, who must be saved to-night... After all, the game is not yet lost...
If the other one vanished just now, it proves that there is a second outlet somewhere near... Come, come, Weber and his merry men haven't got me yet..."
He had already begun to explore the tunnel and, lantern in hand, was examining the bricks of which the horrible walls were formed, when a yell reached his ears, a dreadful yell that made his flesh creep with anguish.
It came from the direction of the trap-door.
And he suddenly remembered that he had left the trap-door open, at the time when he intended to return to the Villa des Glycines.
He hurried back and passed through the first door. His lantern went out on the road; and he felt something, or rather somebody, brush past his knees, somebody crawl along the wall.
And, at that same moment, he had a feeling that this being was disappearing, vanishing, he knew not which way.
Just then his foot knocked against a step.
"This is the outlet," he thought, "the second outlet through which 'he' passes."
Overhead, the cry sounded again, less loud, followed by moans, by a hoarse gurgling...
He ran up the stairs, came out in the basement room, and rushed to the baron.
Altenheim lay dying, with the blood streaming from his throat!
His bonds were cut, but the wire that fastened his wrists and ankles was intact.
His accomplice, being unable to release him, had cut his throat.
Sernine gazed upon the sight with horror.
An icy perspiration covered his whole body.
He thought of Geneviève, imprisoned, helpless, abandoned to the most awful of deaths, because the baron alone knew where she was hidden.
He distinctly heard the policemen open the little back door in the hall.
He distinctly heard them come down the kitchen stairs.
There was nothing between him and them save one door, that of the basement room in which he was.
He bolted the door at the very moment when the aggressors were laying hold of the handle.
The trap-door was open beside him; it meant possible safety, because there remained the second outlet.
"No," he said to himself, "Geneviève first.
Afterward, if I have time, I will think of myself."
He knelt down and put his hand on the baron's breast.
The heart was still beating.
He stooped lower still:
"You can hear me, can't you?"
The eyelids flickered feebly.
The dying man was just breathing.
Was there anything to be obtained from this faint semblance of life?
The policemen were attacking the door, the last rampart.
Sernine whispered.
"I will save you...
I have infallible remedies... One word only ... Geneviève?
..."
It was as though this word of hope revived the man's strength.
Altenheim tried to utter articulate sounds.
"Answer," said Sernine, persisting.
"Answer, and I will save you... Answer...
It means your life to-day ... your liberty to-morrow... Answer!
..."
The door shook under the blows that rained upon it.
The baron gasped out unintelligible syllables. Leaning over him, affrighted, straining all his energy, all his will to the utmost, Sernine panted with anguish. He no longer gave a thought to the policemen, his inevitable capture, prison...
But Geneviève... Geneviève dying of hunger, whom one word from that villain could set free! ...
"Answer!
... You must!
..."
He ordered and entreated by turns.
Altenheim stammered, as though hypnotized and defeated by that indomitable imperiousness:
"Ri ... Rivoli..."
"Rue de Rivoli, is that it?
You have locked her up in a house in that street ... eh?
Which number?"
A loud din ... followed by shouts of triumph...
The door was down.
"Jump on him, lads!"
cried M. Weber.
"Seize him ... seize both of them!"
And Sernine, on his knees:
"The number ... answer...
If you love her, answer... Why keep silence now?"
"Twenty ... twenty-seven," whispered the baron.
Hands were laid on Sernine.
Ten revolvers were pointed at him.
He rose and faced the policemen, who fell back with instinctive dread.
"If you stir, Lupin," cried M. Weber, with his revolver leveled at him, "I'll blow out your brains."'
"Don't shoot."
said Sernine, solemnly.
"It's not necessary.
I surrender."
"Humbug!
This is another of your tricks!"
"No," replied Sernine, "the battle is lost.
You have no right to shoot.
I am not defending myself."
He took out two revolvers and threw them on the floor.
"Humbug!"
M. Weber repeated, implacably.
"Aim straight at his heart, lads!
At the least movement, fire!
At the least word, fire!"
There were ten men there.
He placed five more in position.
He pointed their fifteen right arms at the mark.
And, raging, shaking with joy and fear, he snarled:
"At his heart!
At his head!
And no pity!
If he stirs, if he speaks ... shoot him where he stands!"
Sernine smiled, impassively, with his hands in his pockets.
Death was there, waiting for him, at two inches from his chest, at two inches from his temples.
Fifteen fingers were curled round the triggers.
"Ah," chuckled M. Weber, "this is nice, this is very nice!
... And I think that this time we've scored ... and it's a nasty look-out for you, Master Lupin!
..."
He made one of his men draw back the shutters of a large air-hole, which admitted a sudden burst of daylight, and he turned toward Altenheim.
But, to his great amazement, the baron, whom he thought dead, opened his eyes, glazed, awful eyes, already filled with all the signs of the coming dissolution.
He stared at M. Weber.
Then he seemed to look for somebody and, catching sight of Sernine, had a convulsion of anger.
He seemed to be waking from his torpor; and his suddenly reviving hatred restored a part of his strength.
He raised himself on his two wrists and tried to speak.
"You know him, eh?"
asked M. Weber.
"Yes."
"It's Lupin, isn't it?"
"Yes... Lupin..."
Sernine, still smiling, listened:
"Heavens, how I'm amusing myself!"
he declared.
"Have you anything more to say?"
asked M. Weber, who saw the baron's lips making desperate attempts to move.
"Yes."
"About M. Lenormand, perhaps?"
"Yes."
"Have you shut him up?
Where?
Answer!
..."
With all his heaving body, with all his tense glance, Altenheim pointed to a cupboard in the corner of the room.
"There ... there ..." he said.
"Ah, we're burning!"
chuckled Lupin.
M. Weber opened the cupboard.
On one of the shelves was a parcel wrapped in black cloth.
He opened it and found a hat, a little box, some clothes...
He gave a start.
He had recognized M. Lenormand's olive-green frock-coat.
"Oh, the villains!"
he cried.
"They have murdered him!"
"No," said Altenheim, shaking his head.
"Then ...
?"
"It's he ... he ..."
"What do you mean by 'he'?
... Did Lupin kill the chief?"
"No..."
Altenheim was clinging to existence with fierce obstinacy, eager to speak and to accuse...
The secret which he wished to reveal was at the tip of his tongue and he was not able, did not know how to translate it into words.
"Come," the deputy-chief insisted.
"M. Lenormand is dead, surely?"
"No."
"He's alive?"
"Yes."
"I don't understand... Look here, these clothes?
This frock-coat?
..."
Altenheim turned his eyes toward Sernine.
An idea struck M. Weber:
"Ah, I see!
Lupin stole M. Lenormand's clothes and reckoned upon using them to escape with..."
"Yes ... yes..."
"Not bad," cried the deputy-chief.
"It's quite a trick in his style.
In this room, we should have found Lupin disguised as M. Lenormand, chained up, no doubt.
It would have meant his safety; only he hadn't time.
That's it, isn't it?"
"Yes ... yes ..."
But, by the appearance of the dying man's eyes, M. Weber felt that there was more, and that the secret was not exactly that.
What was it, then?
What was the strange and unintelligible puzzle which Altenheim wanted to explain before dying?
He questioned him again:
"And where is M. Lenormand himself?"
"There..."
"What do you mean?
Here?"
"Yes."
"But there are only ourselves here!"
"There's ... there's ..."
"Oh, speak!"
"There's ... Ser ...
Sernine."
"Sernine!
... Eh, what?"
"Sernine ... Lenormand..."
M. Weber gave a jump.
A sudden light flashed across him.
"No, no, it's not possible," he muttered.
"This is madness."
He gave a side-glance at his prisoner.
Sernine seemed to be greatly diverted and to be watching the scene with the air of a playgoer who is thoroughly amused and very anxious to know how the piece is going to end.
Altenheim, exhausted by his efforts, had fallen back at full length. Would he die before revealing the solution of the riddle which his strange words had propounded?
M. Weber, shaken by an absurd, incredible surmise, which he did not wish to entertain and which persisted in his mind in spite of him, made a fresh, determined attempt:
"Explain the thing to us... What's at the bottom of it?
What mystery?"
The other seemed not to hear and lay lifeless, with staring eyes.
M. Weber lay down beside him, with his body touching him, and, putting great stress upon his words, so that each syllable should sink down to the very depths of that brain already merged in darkness, said:
"Listen...
I have understood you correctly, have I not?
Lupin and M. Lenormand..."
He needed an effort to continue, so monstrous did the words appear to him.
Nevertheless, the baron's dimmed eyes seemed to contemplate him with anguish.
He finished the sentence, shaking with excitement, as though he were speaking blasphemy:
"That's it, isn't it?
You're sure?
The two are one and the same?
..."
The eyes did not move.
A little blood trickled from one corner of the man's mouth...
He gave two or three sobs... A last spasm; and all was over ...
A long silence reigned in that basement room filled with people.
Almost all the policemen guarding Sernine had turned round and, stupefied, not understanding or not willing to understand, they still listened to the incredible accusation which the dying scoundrel had been unable to put into words.
M. Weber took the little box which was in the parcel and opened it.
It contained a gray wig, a pair of spectacles, a maroon-colored neckerchief and, in a false bottom, a pot or two of make-up and a case containing some tiny tufts of gray hair: in short, all that was needed to complete a perfect disguise in the character of M. Lenormand.
He went up to Sernine and, looking at him for a few seconds without speaking, thoughtfully reconstructing all the phases of the adventure, he muttered:
"So it's true?"
Sernine, who had retained his smiling calmness, replied:
"The suggestion is a pretty one and a bold one.
But, before I answer, tell your men to stop worrying me with those toys of theirs."
"Very well," said M. Weber, making a sign to his men.
"And now answer."
"What?"
"Are you M.
Lenormand?"
"Yes."
Exclamations arose.
Jean Doudeville, who was there, while his brother was watching the secret outlet, Jean Doudeville, Sernine's own accomplice, looked at him in dismay.
M. Weber stood undecided.
"That takes your breath away, eh?" said Sernine. "I admit that it's rather droll... Lord, how you used to make me laugh sometimes, when we were working together, you and I, the chief and the deputy-chief!
... And the funniest thing is that you thought our worthy M. Lenormand dead ... as well as poor Gourel.
But no, no, old chap: there's life in the old dog yet!"
He pointed to Altenheim's corpse.
"There, it was that scoundrel who pitched me into the water, in a sack, with a paving-stone round my waist.
Only, he forgot to take away my knife.
And with a knife one rips open sacks and cuts ropes.
So you see, you unfortunate Altenheim: if you had thought of that, you wouldn't be where you are! ...
But enough said... Peace to your ashes!"
M. Weber listened, not knowing what to think.
At last, he made a gesture of despair, as though he gave up the idea of forming a reasonable opinion.
"The handcuffs," he said, suddenly alarmed.
"If it amuses you," said Sernine.
And, picking out Doudeville in the front row of his assailants, he put out his wrists:
"There, my friend, you shall have the honour ... and don't trouble to exert yourself...
I'm playing square ... as it's no use doing anything else..."
He said this in a tone that gave Doudeville to understand that the struggle was finished for the moment and that there was nothing to do but submit.
Doudeville fastened the handcuffs.
Without moving his lips or contracting a muscle of his face, Sernine whispered:
"27, Rue de Rivoli ... Genevi&#232;ve..."
M. Weber could not suppress a movement of satisfaction at the sight:
"Come along!"
he said.
"To the detective-office!"
"That's it, to the detective-office!"
cried Sernine.
"M. Lenormand will enter Ars&#232;ne Lupin in the jail-book; and Ars&#232;ne Lupin will enter Prince Sernine."
"You're too clever, Lupin."
"That's true, Weber; we shall never get on, you and I."
During the drive in the motor-car, escorted by three other cars filled with policemen, he did not utter a word.
They did not stay long at the detective office.
M. Weber, remembering the escapes effected by Lupin, sent him up at once to the finger-print department and then took him to the D&#233;p&#244;t, whence he was sent on to the Sant&#233; Prison.
The governor had been warned by telephone and was waiting for him.
The formalities of the entry of commitment and of the searching were soon got over; and, at seven o'clock in the evening, Prince Paul Sernine crossed the threshold of cell 14 in the second division:
"Not half bad, your rooms," he declared, "not bad at all!
... Electric light, central heating, every requisite ... capital!
Mr.
Governor, I'll take this room."
He flung himself on the bed:
"Oh, Mr.
Governor, I have one little favor to ask of you!"
"What is that?"
"Tell them not to bring me my chocolate before ten o'clock in the morning...
I'm awfully sleepy."
He turned his face to the wall.
Five minutes later he was sound asleep.